12.7 Forms
12.7.1          General
A PDF document may contain both interactive and non-Interactive forms.
An interactive form (PDF 1.2) — sometimes referred to as an AcroForm — is a collection of fields for
gathering information interactively from the user. A PDF document may contain any number of fields
appearing on any combination of pages, all of which make up a single, global interactive form spanning
the entire document. Arbitrary subsets of these fields can be imported or exported from the document.
NOTE       Interactive forms are not to be confused with form XObjects (see 8.10, "Form XObjects"). Despite
the similarity of names, the two are different, unrelated types of objects.
A non-interactive form (PDF 1.7) is a static representation of form fields. Such forms may have
originally contained interactive fields such as text fields and radio buttons but were converted into
non-interactive PDF files, they may represent form fields and/or data converted from external sources,
or they may have been designed to be printed out and filled in manually. See 12.7.9, "Non-interactive
forms".
12.7.2          Interactive Forms
Each field in a document’s form shall be defined by a field dictionary (see 12.7.4, "Field dictionaries").
For purposes of definition and naming, the fields can be organised hierarchically and can inherit
attributes from their ancestors in the field hierarchy. A field’s children in the hierarchy may also
include widget annotations (see 12.5.6.19, "Widget annotations") that define its appearance on the
page. A field that has children that are fields is called a non-terminal field. A field that does not have
children that are fields is called a terminal field.
A terminal field in an interactive form may have children that are widget annotations (see 12.5.6.19,
"Widget annotations") that define its appearance on the page. As a convenience, when a field has only a
single associated widget annotation, the contents of the field dictionary and the annotation dictionary
(12.5.2, "Annotation dictionaries") may be merged into a single dictionary containing entries that
528                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
pertain to both a field and an annotation. (This presents no ambiguity, since the contents of the two
kinds of dictionaries do not conflict.) If such an object defines an appearance stream, the appearance
shall be consistent with the object’s current value as a field.
NOTE         Fields containing text whose contents are not known in advance will need to construct their
appearance streams dynamically instead of defining them statically in an appearance dictionary;
see 12.7.4.3, "Variable text".
12.7.3            Interactive form dictionary
The contents and properties of a document’s interactive form shall be defined by an interactive form
dictionary that shall be referenced from the AcroForm entry in the document catalog dictionary (see
7.7.2, "Document catalog dictionary"). "Table 224 — Entries in the interactive form dictionary" shows
the contents of this dictionary.
Table 224 — Entries in the interactive form dictionary
Key                     Type                 Value
Fields                  array                (Required) An array of references to the document’s root
fields (those with no ancestors in the field hierarchy).
NeedAppearances         boolean              (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) A flag specifying whether
to construct appearance streams and appearance
dictionaries for all widget annotations in the document (see
12.7.4.3, "Variable text"). Default value: false. A PDF writer
shall include this key, with a value of true, if it has not
provided appearance streams for all visible widget
annotations present in the document.
NOTE     Appearance streams are required in PDF 2.0 and later.
SigFlags                integer              (Optional; PDF 1.3) A set of flags specifying various
document-level characteristics related to signature fields
(see "Table 225 — Signature flags", and 12.7.5.5, "Signature
fields"). Default value: 0.
CO                      array                (Required if any fields in the document have additional-
actions dictionaries containing a C entry; PDF 1.3) An array of
indirect references to field dictionaries with calculation
actions, defining the calculation order in which their values
will be recalculated when the value of any field changes (see
12.6.3, "Trigger events").
DR                      dictionary           (Optional) A resource dictionary (see 7.8.3, "Resource
dictionaries") containing default resources (such as fonts,
patterns, or colour spaces) that shall be used by form field
appearance streams. At a minimum, this dictionary shall
contain a Font entry specifying the resource name and font
dictionary of the default font for displaying text.
DA                      string               (Optional) A document-wide default value for the DA
attribute of variable text fields (see 12.7.4.3, "Variable text").
Q                       integer              (Optional) A document-wide default value for the Q attribute
of variable text fields (see 12.7.4.3, "Variable text").
Key                  Type              Value
XFA                  stream or array (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) A stream or array
containing an XFA resource, whose format shall conform to
the Data Package (XDP) Specification.
See Annex K, “XFA forms”.
The value of the interactive form dictionary’s SigFlags entry is an unsigned 32-bit integer containing
flags specifying various document-level characteristics related to signature fields (see 12.7.5.5,
"Signature fields"). Bit positions within the flag word shall be numbered from 1 (low-order) to 32
(high-order). "Table 225 — Signature flags" shows the meanings of the flags; all undefined flag bits
shall be reserved and shall be set to 0.
Table 225 — Signature flags
Bit position    Name            Meaning
1               SignaturesExist If set, the document contains at least one signature field. This
flag allows an interactive PDF processor to enable user
interface items (such as menu items or push-buttons) related to
signature processing without having to scan the entire
document for the presence of signature fields.
2               AppendOnly      If set, the document contains signatures that may be invalidated
if the PDF file is saved (written) in a way that alters its previous
contents, as opposed to an incremental update. Merely updating
the PDF file by appending new information to the end of the
previous version is safe (see H.7, "Updating example").
Interactive PDF processors may use this flag to inform a user
requesting a full save that signatures will be invalidated and
require explicit confirmation before continuing with the
operation.
12.7.4          Field dictionaries
12.7.4.1        General
Each field in a document’s interactive form shall be defined by a field dictionary, which shall be an
indirect object. The field dictionaries may be organised hierarchically into one or more tree structures.
Many field attributes are inheritable, meaning that if they are not explicitly specified for a given field,
their values are taken from those of its parent in the field hierarchy. Such inheritable attributes shall be
designated as such in the "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries" and "Table 227 —
Field flags common to all field types". The designation (Required; inheritable) means that an attribute
shall be defined for every field, whether explicitly in its own field dictionary or by inheritance from an
ancestor in the hierarchy. The inheritable behavior of field dictionaries are similar to that of Pages (see
7.7.3.4, "Inheritance of page attributes"). An interactive PDF processor shall not limit the range of
inheritance for field dictionaries. "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries" shows those
entries that are common to all field dictionaries, regardless of type. Entries that pertain only to a
530                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
particular type of field are described in the relevant subclauses referred to in "Table 226 — Entries
common to all field dictionaries".
Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries
Key        Type          Value
FT         name          (Required for terminal fields; inheritable) The type of field that this dictionary
describes:
Btn      Button (see 12.7.5.2, "Button fields")
Tx       Text (see 12.7.5.3, "Text fields")
Ch       Choice (see 12.7.5.4, "Choice fields")
Sig      (PDF 1.3) Signature (see 12.7.5.5, "Signature fields")
This entry may be present in a non-terminal field (one whose descendants are fields)
to provide an inheritable FT value. However, a non-terminal field does not logically
have a type of its own; it is merely a container for inheritable attributes that are
intended for descendant terminal fields of any type.
Parent dictionary        (Required if this field is the child of another in the field hierarchy; absent otherwise) The
field that is the immediate parent of this one (the field, if any, whose Kids array
includes this field). A field can have at most one parent; that is, it can be included in
the Kids array of at most one other field.
Kids       array         (Sometimes required, as described below) An array of indirect references to the
immediate children of this field.
In a non-terminal field, the Kids array shall refer to field dictionaries that are
immediate descendants of this field. In a terminal field, the Kids array ordinarily shall
refer to one or more separate widget annotations that are associated with this field.
However, if there is only one associated widget annotation, and its contents have been
merged into the field dictionary, Kids shall be omitted.
T          text string   (Required) The partial field name (see 12.7.4.2, "Field names").
TU         text string   (Optional; PDF 1.3) An alternative field name that shall be used in place of the actual
field name wherever the field shall be identified in the user interface (such as in error
or status messages referring to the field). This text is also useful when extracting the
document’s contents in support of accessibility to users with disabilities or for other
purposes (see 14.9.3, "Alternate descriptions").
TM         text string   (Optional; PDF 1.3) The mapping name that shall be used when exporting interactive
form field data from the document.
Ff         integer       (Optional; inheritable) A set of flags specifying various characteristics of the field (see
"Table 227 — Field flags common to all field types"). Default value: 0.
V          (various)     (Optional; inheritable) The field’s value, whose format varies depending on the field
type. See the descriptions of individual field types for further information.
DV         (various)     (Optional; inheritable) The default value to which the field reverts when a reset-form
action is executed (see 12.7.6.3, "Reset-form action"). The format of this value is the
same as that of V.
AA         dictionary    (Optional; PDF 1.2) An additional-actions dictionary defining the field’s behaviour in
response to various trigger events (see 12.6.3, "Trigger events"). This entry has
exactly the same meaning as the AA entry in an annotation dictionary (see 12.5.2,
"Annotation dictionaries").
The value of the field dictionary’s Ff entry is an unsigned 32-bit integer containing flags specifying
various characteristics of the field. Bit positions within the flag word shall be numbered from 1 (low-
order) to 32 (high-order). The flags shown in "Table 227 — Field flags common to all field types" are
common to all types of fields. Flags that apply only to specific field types are discussed in the
subclauses describing those types. All undefined flag bits shall be reserved and shall be set to 0.
Table 227 — Field flags common to all field types
Bit position Name              Meaning
1                ReadOnly If set, an interactive PDF processor shall not allow a user to change the value of
the field. Additionally, any associated widget annotations should not interact with
the user; that is, they should not respond to mouse clicks nor change their
appearance in response to mouse motions.
NOTE: This flag is useful for fields whose values are computed or imported from a
database.
2                Required      If set, the field shall have a value at the time it is exported by a submit-form action
(see 12.7.6.2, "Submit-form action").
3                NoExport If set, the field shall not be exported by a submit-form action (see 12.7.6.2,
"Submit-form action").
12.7.4.2          Field names
The T entry in the field dictionary (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries" holds a
text string defining the field’s partial field name. The fully qualified field name is not explicitly defined
but shall be constructed from the partial field names of the field and all of its ancestors. For a field with
no parent, the partial and fully qualified names are the same. For a field that is the child of another
field, the fully qualified name shall be formed by appending the child field’s partial name to the parent’s
fully qualified name, separated by a PERIOD (2Eh) as shown:
parent’s_full_name.child’s_partial_name
EXAMPLE           If a field with the partial field name PersonalData has a child whose partial name is Address, which in turn
has a child with the partial name ZipCode, the fully qualified name of this last field is
PersonalData.Address.ZipCode
Because the PERIOD is used as a separator for fully qualified names, a partial name shall not contain a
PERIOD character. Thus, all fields descended from a common ancestor share the ancestor’s fully
qualified field name as a common prefix in their own fully qualified names.
A field dictionary that does not have a partial field name (T entry) of its own shall not be considered a
field but simply a Widget annotation. Such annotations are different representations of the same
underlying field; they should differ only in properties that specify their visual appearance. In addition,
actual field dictionaries with the same fully qualified field name shall have the same field type (FT),
value (V), and default value (DV).
532                                                                                                © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
EXAMPLE           A field with the fully qualified field name of PersonalData.Address.ZipCode can have multiple unnamed
children representing different Widget annotations in multiple locations. Such children, although visually
different, would represent the same field value to users.
12.7.4.3          Variable text
When the contents and properties of a field are known in advance, its visual appearance can be
specified by an appearance stream defined in the PDF file (see 12.5.5, "Appearance streams" and
12.5.6.19, "Widget annotations"). In some cases, however, the field may contain text whose value is not
known until viewing time.
NOTE         Examples include text fields to be filled in with text typed by the user from the keyboard,
scrollable list boxes whose contents are determined interactively at the time the document is
displayed and fields containing current dates or values calculated by an ECMAScript.
In such cases, the PDF document cannot provide a statically defined appearance stream for displaying
the field. Instead, the PDF processor shall construct an appearance stream dynamically at rendering
time. The dictionary entries shown in "Table 228 — Additional entries common to all fields containing
variable text" provide general information about the field’s appearance that can be combined with the
specific text it contains to construct an appearance stream.
Table 228 — Additional entries common to all fields containing variable text
Key      Type               Value
DA       string             (Required; inheritable) The default appearance string containing a sequence
of valid page-content graphics or text state operators that define such
properties as the field’s text size and colour.
Q        integer            (Optional; inheritable) A code specifying the form of quadding
(justification) that shall be used in displaying the text:
0     Left-justified
1     Centred
2     Right-justified
Default value: 0 (left-justified).
DS       text string        (Optional; PDF 1.5) A default style string, as described in Adobe XML
Architecture, XML Forms Architecture (XFA) Specification, version 3.3.
RV       text string or     (Optional; PDF 1.5) A rich text string, as described in Adobe XML
text stream        Architecture, XML Forms Architecture (XFA) Specification, version 3.3.
The new appearance stream becomes the normal appearance (N) in the appearance dictionary
associated with the field’s widget annotation (see "Table 170 — Entries in an appearance dictionary").
In PDF 1.5, form fields that have the RichText flag set (see "Table 231 — Field flags specific to text
fields") specify formatting information as described in Adobe XML Architecture, XML Forms Architecture
(XFA) Specification, version 3.3. For these fields, the following conventions are not used, and the entire
annotation appearance shall be regenerated each time the value is changed.
For non-rich text fields, the appearance stream — which, like all appearance streams, is a form XObject
— has the contents of its form dictionary initialised as follows:
•    The resource dictionary (Resources) shall be created using resources from the interactive form
dictionary’s DR entry (see "Table 224 — Entries in the interactive form dictionary").
•    The lower-left corner of the bounding box (BBox) is set to coordinates (0, 0) in the form
coordinate system. The box’s top and right coordinates are taken from the dimensions of the
annotation rectangle (the Rect entry in the widget annotation dictionary).
•    All other entries in the appearance stream’s form dictionary are set to their default values (see
8.10, "Form XObjects").
EXAMPLE          The appearance stream includes the following section of marked-content, which represents the portion of
the stream that draws the text:
/Tx BMC                                                        %Begin marked-content with tag Tx
q                                                        %Save graphics state
… Any required graphics state changes, such as clipping …
BT                                                   %Begin text object
… Default appearance string ( DA ) …
… Text-positioning and text-showing operators to show the variable text …
ET                                                   %End text object
Q                                                        %Restore graphics state
EMC                                                            %End marked-content
The BMC (begin marked-content) and EMC (end marked-content) operators are discussed in 14.6, "Marked
content", q (save graphics state) and Q (restore graphics state) are discussed in 8.4.4, "Graphics state
operators", BT (begin text object) and ET (end text object) are discussed in 9.4, "Text objects". See the
Example in 12.7.5.3, "Text fields" for an example of their use.
The default appearance string (DA) contains any graphics state or text state operators needed to
establish the graphics state parameters, such as text size and colour, for displaying the field’s variable
text. Only operators that are allowed within text objects shall occur in this string (see "Figure 9 —
Graphics objects"). At a minimum, the string shall include a Tf (text font) operator along with its two
operands, font and size. The specified font value shall match a resource name in the Font entry of the
default resource dictionary (referenced from the DR entry of the interactive form dictionary; see
"Table 224 — Entries in the interactive form dictionary"). A zero value for size means that the font
shall be auto-sized: its size shall be computed as an implementation dependent function.
The default appearance string shall contain at most one Tm (text matrix) operator. If this operator is
present, the interactive PDF processor shall replace the horizontal and vertical translation components
with positioning values it determines to be appropriate, based on the field value, the quadding (Q)
attribute, and any layout rules it employs. If the default appearance string contains no Tm operator,
the viewer shall insert one in the appearance stream (with appropriate horizontal and vertical
translation components) after the default appearance string and before the text-positioning and text-
showing operators for the variable text.
To update an existing appearance stream to reflect a new field value, the interactive PDF processor
shall first copy any needed resources from the document’s DR dictionary (see "Table 224 — Entries in
the interactive form dictionary") into the stream’s Resources dictionary. (If the DR and Resources
dictionaries contain resources with the same name, the one already in the Resources dictionary shall
be left intact, not replaced with the corresponding value from the DR dictionary.) The interactive PDF
processor shall then replace the existing contents of the appearance stream from /Tx BMC to the
matching EMC with the corresponding new contents as shown in Example 1 in 12.7.5.2.3, "Check
boxes", 12.7.5, "Field types" (If the existing appearance stream contains no marked-content with tag
Tx, the new contents shall be appended to the end of the original stream.)
534                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.7.5            Field types
12.7.5.1          General
Interactive forms support the following field types:
•    Button fields represent interactive controls on the screen that the user can manipulate with the
mouse. They include push-buttons, check boxes, and radio buttons.
•    Text fields are boxes or spaces in which the user can enter text from the keyboard.
•    Choice fields contain several text items, at most one of which may be selected as the field value.
They include scrollable list boxes and combo boxes.
•    Signature fields represent digital signatures and optional data for authenticating the name of the
signer and the document’s contents.
The following subclauses describe each of these field types in detail.
12.7.5.2          Button fields
12.7.5.2.1        General
A button field (field type Btn) represents an interactive control on the screen that the user can
manipulate with the mouse. There are three types of button fields:
•    A push-button is a purely interactive control that responds immediately to user input without
retaining a permanent value (see 12.7.5.2.2, "Push-buttons").
•    A check box toggles between two states, on and off (see 12.7.5.2.3, "Check boxes").
•    Radio button fields contain a set of related buttons that can each be on or off. Typically, at most
one radio button in a set may be on at any given time, and selecting any one of the buttons
automatically deselects all the others. (There are exceptions to this rule, as noted in 12.7.5.2.4,
"Radio buttons")
For button fields, bits 15, 16, 17, and 26 shall indicate the intended behaviour of the button field. An
interactive PDF processor shall follow the intended behaviour, as defined in "Table 229 — Field flags
specific to button fields" and clauses 12.7.5.2.2, "Push-buttons", and 12.7.5.2.4, "Radio buttons".
Table 229 — Field flags specific to button fields
Bit position      Name                Meaning
15                NoToggleToOff (Radio buttons only) If set, exactly one radio button shall be
selected at all times; selecting the currently selected button has
no effect. If clear, clicking the selected button deselects it,
leaving no button selected.
16                Radio               If set, the field is a set of radio buttons; if clear, the field is a
check box. This flag may be set only if the Pushbutton flag is
clear.
17                Pushbutton          If set, the field is a push-button that does not retain a
permanent value.
Bit position    Name               Meaning
26              RadiosInUnison (PDF 1.5) If set, a group of radio buttons within a radio button
field that use the same value for the on state will turn on and off
in unison; that is if one is checked, they are all checked. If clear,
the buttons are mutually exclusive (the same behaviour as
HTML radio buttons).
12.7.5.2.2     Push-buttons
A push-button field shall have a field type of Btn and the Pushbutton flag (see "Table 229 — Field flags
specific to button fields") set to one. Because this type of retains no permanent value, it shall not use
the V and DV entries in the field dictionary (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field
dictionaries").
12.7.5.2.3     Check boxes
A check box field represents one or more check boxes that toggle between two states, on and off, when
manipulated by the user with the mouse or keyboard. Its field type shall be Btn and its Pushbutton and
Radio flags (see "Table 229 — Field flags specific to button fields") shall both be clear. Each state can
have a separate appearance, which shall be defined by an appearance stream in the appearance
dictionary of the field’s widget annotation (see 12.5.5, "Appearance streams"). The appearance for the
off state is optional but, if present, shall be stored in the appearance dictionary under the name Off.
The V entry in the field dictionary (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries") holds a
name object representing the check box’s appearance state, which shall be used to select the
appropriate appearance from the appearance dictionary. The value of the V key shall also be the value
of the AS key. If they are not equal, then the value of the AS key shall be used instead of the V key to
determine which appearance to use.
EXAMPLE 1      This example shows a typical check box definition.
1 0 obj
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /Widget
/Rect [100 100 120 120]
/FT /Btn
/T (Urgent)
/V /Yes
/AS /Yes
/AP <</N <</Yes 2 0 R /Off 3 0 R>>
>>
endobj
2 0 obj
<</Type /XObject
/Subtype /Form
/BBox [0 0 20 20]
/Resources 20 0 R
/Length 104
>>
stream
q
0 0 1 rg
BT
/ZaDb 12 Tf
536                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
0 0 Td
(4) Tj
ET
Q
endstream
endobj
3 0 obj
<</Type /XObject
/Subtype /Form
/BBox [0 0 20 20]
/Resources 20 0 R
/Length 104
>>
stream
q
0 0 1 rg
BT
/ZaDb 12 Tf
0 0 Td
(8) Tj
ET
Q
endstream
endobj
Beginning with PDF 1.4, the field dictionary for check boxes and radio buttons may contain an optional
Opt entry (see "Table 230 — Additional entry specific to check box and radio button fields"). If present,
the Opt entry shall be an array of text strings representing the export value of each annotation in the
field. It may be used for the following purposes:
•    To represent the export values of check box and radio button fields in non-Latin writing systems
(because name objects in the appearance dictionary cannot represent non-Latin text).
•    To allow radio buttons or check boxes to be checked independently, even if they have the same
export value.
EXAMPLE 2         A group of check boxes may be duplicated on more than one page such that the desired behaviour is that
when a user checks a box, the corresponding boxes on each of the other pages are also checked. In this case,
each of the corresponding check boxes is a widget in the Kids array of a check box field.
For radio buttons, the same behaviour shall occur only if the RadiosInUnison flag is set. If it is not set, at
most one radio button in a field shall be set at a time.
Table 230 — Additional entry specific to check box and radio button fields
Key      Type               Value
Opt      array of text (Optional; inheritable; PDF 1.4) An array containing one entry for each
strings       widget annotation in the Kids array of the radio button or check box field.
Each entry shall be a text string representing the on state of the
corresponding widget annotation.
When this entry is present, the names used to represent the on state in the
AP dictionary of each annotation may use numerical position (starting with
0) of the annotation in the Kids array, encoded as a name object (for
example: /0, /1). This allows distinguishing between the annotations even if
two or more of them have the same value in the Opt array.
12.7.5.2.4      Radio buttons
A radio button field is a set of related buttons. Like check boxes, individual radio buttons have two
states, on and off. A single radio button may not be turned off directly but only as a result of another
button being turned on. Typically, a set of radio buttons (annotations that are children of a single radio
button field) have at most one button in the on state at any given time; selecting any of the buttons
automatically deselects all the others.
NOTE       An exception occurs when multiple radio buttons in a field have the same on state and the
RadiosInUnison flag is set. In that case, turning on one of the buttons turns on all of them.
The field type is Btn, the Pushbutton flag (see "Table 229 — Field flags specific to button fields") is
clear, and the Radio flag is set. This type of button field has an additional flag, NoToggleToOff, which
specifies, if set, that exactly one of the radio buttons shall be selected at all times. In this case, clicking
the currently selected button has no effect; if the NoToggleToOff flag is clear, clicking the selected
button deselects it, leaving no button selected.
The Kids entry in the radio button field’s field dictionary (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field
dictionaries") holds an array of widget annotations representing the individual buttons in the set. The
parent field’s V entry holds a name object corresponding to the appearance state of whichever child
field is currently in the on state; the default value for this entry is Off. The value of the V key shall also
be the value of the AS key. If they are not equal, then the value of the AS key shall be used instead of the
V key to determine which appearance to use.
EXAMPLE         This example shows the object definitions for a set of radio buttons.
10 0 obj                                       %Radio button field
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /Widget
/Rect [100 100 120 120]
/FT /Btn
/Ff …                                 %…Radio flag = 16, Pushbutton = 17 …
/T (Credit card)
/V /cardbrand1
/Kids [11 0 R 12 0 R]
>>
endobj
11 0 obj                                       %First radio button
<</Parent 10 0 R
/AS /cardbrand1
/AP <</N <</cardbrand1 8 0 R
/Off 9 0 R
>>
>>
>>
endobj
12 0 obj %Second radio button
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /Widget
/Rect [200 200 220 220]
/Parent 10 0 R
/AS /Off
/AP <</N <</cardbrand2 8 0 R
/Off 9 0 R
>>
>>
>>
538                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
endobj
8 0 obj                                          %Appearance stream for "on" state
<</Type /XObject
/Subtype /Form
/BBox [0 0 20 20]
/Resources 20 0 R
/Length 104
>>
stream
q
0 0 1 rg
BT
/ZaDb 12 Tf
0 0 Td
(8) Tj
ET
Q
endstream
endobj
9 0 obj                                          %Appearance stream for "off" state
<</Type /XObject
/Subtype /Form
/BBox [0 0 20 20]
/Resources 20 0 R
/Length 104
>>
stream
q
0 0 1 rg
BT
/ZaDb 12 Tf
0 0 Td
(4) Tj
ET
Q
endstream
endobj
Like a check box field, a radio button field may use the optional Opt entry in the field dictionary (PDF
1.4) to define export values for its constituent radio buttons, using Unicode encoding for non-Latin
characters (see "Table 230 — Additional entry specific to check box and radio button fields").
12.7.5.3          Text fields
A text field (field type Tx) is a box or space for text fill-in data typically entered from a keyboard. The
text may be restricted to a single line or may be permitted to span multiple lines, depending on the
setting of the Multiline flag in the field dictionary’s Ff entry. "Table 231 — Field flags specific to text
fields" shows the flags pertaining to this type of field. A text field shall have a field type of Tx. A
conforming PDF file, and an interactive PDF processor shall obey the usage guidelines in "Table 231 —
Field flags specific to text fields".
Table 231 — Field flags specific to text fields
Bit position Name                     Meaning
13               Multiline            If set, the field may contain multiple lines of text; if clear, the field’s text
shall be restricted to a single line.
Bit position Name               Meaning
14           Password           If set, the field is intended for entering a secure password that should
not be echoed visibly to the screen. Characters typed from the keyboard
shall instead be echoed in some unreadable form, such as asterisks or
bullet characters.
NOTE    To protect password confidentiality, it is imperative that PDF
processors never store the value of the text field in the PDF file if this
flag is set.
21           FileSelect         (PDF 1.4) If set, the text entered in the field represents the pathname of
a file whose contents shall be submitted as the value of the field.
23           DoNotSpellCheck (PDF 1.4) If set, text entered in the field shall not be spell-checked.
24           DoNotScroll        (PDF 1.4) If set, the field shall not scroll (horizontally for single-line
fields, vertically for multiple-line fields) to accommodate more text than
fits within its annotation rectangle. Once the field is full, no further text
shall be accepted for interactive form filling; for non-interactive form
filling, the filler should take care not to add more character than will
visibly fit in the defined area.
25           Comb               (PDF 1.5) May be set only if the MaxLen entry is present in the text field
dictionary (see "Table 232 — Additional entry specific to a text field")
and if the Multiline, Password, and FileSelect flags are clear. If set, the
field shall be automatically divided into as many equally spaced
positions, or combs, as the value of MaxLen, and the text is laid out into
those combs.
26           RichText           (PDF 1.5) If set, the value of this field shall be a rich text string (see
Adobe XML Architecture, XML Forms Architecture (XFA) Specification,
version 3.3). If the field has a value, the RV entry of the field dictionary
("Table 228 — Additional entries common to all fields containing
variable text") shall specify the rich text string.
The field’s text shall be held in a text string (or, beginning with PDF 1.5, a stream) in the V (value) entry
of the field dictionary. The contents of this text string or stream shall be used to construct an
appearance stream for displaying the field, as described under 12.7.4.3, "Variable text" The text shall
be presented in a single style (font, size, colour, and so forth), as specified by the DA (default
appearance) string.
If the FileSelect flag (PDF 1.4) is set, the field shall function as a file-select control. In this case, the
field’s text represents the pathname of a file whose contents shall be submitted as the field’s value:
•    For fields submitted in HTML Form format, the submission shall use the MIME content type
multipart / form-data, as described in Internet RFC 2045.
•    For Forms Data Format (FDF) submission, the value of the V entry in the FDF field dictionary (see
12.7.8.3.2, "FDF fields") shall be a file specification (7.11, "File specifications") identifying the
selected file.
•    XML is not supported for file-select controls; therefore, no value shall be submitted in this case.
Besides the usual entries common to all fields (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field
dictionaries") and to fields containing variable text (see "Table 228 — Additional entries common
to all fields containing variable text"), the field dictionary for a text field may contain the
540                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
additional entry shown in "Table 232 — Additional entry specific to a text field".
Table 232 — Additional entry specific to a text field
Key           Type         Value
MaxLen        integer      (Optional; inheritable) The maximum length of the field’s text, in characters.
EXAMPLE           The following example shows the object definitions for a typical text field.
6 0 obj
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /Widget
/Rect [100 100 400 220]
/FT /Tx
/Ff …                                                                 %Set Multiline flag
/T (Silly prose)
/DA (0 0 1 rg /Ti 12 Tf)
/V (The quick brown fox ate the lazy mouse)
/AP <</N 5 0 R>>
>>
endobj
5 0 obj
<</Type /XObject
/Subtype /Form
/BBox [0 0 300 120]
/Resources 21 0 R
/Length 172
>>
stream
/Tx BMC
q
BT
0 0 1 rg
/Ti 12 Tf
1 0 0 1 100 100 Tm
0 0 Td
(The quick brown fox) Tj
0 -13 Td
(ate the lazy mouse.) Tj
ET
Q
EMC
endstream
endobj
12.7.5.4          Choice fields
A choice field shall have a field type of Ch that contains several text items, one or more of which shall be
selected as the field value. The items may be presented to the user in one of the following two forms:
•    A scrollable list box
•    A combo box consisting of a drop-down list. The combo box may be accompanied by an editable
text box in which the user can type a value other than the predefined choices, as directed by the
value of the Edit bit in the Ff entry.
The various types of choice fields are distinguished by flags in the Ff entry, as shown in "Table 233 —
Field flags specific to choice fields". "Table 234 — Additional entries specific to a choice field" shows
the field dictionary entries specific to choice fields.
Table 233 — Field flags specific to choice fields
Bit position       Name                     Meaning
18                 Combo                    If set, the field is a combo box; if clear, the field is a list box.
19                 Edit                     If set, the combo box shall include an editable text box as
well as a drop-down list; if clear, it shall include only a drop-
down list. This flag shall be used only if the Combo flag is
set.
20                 Sort                     If set, the field’s option items shall be sorted alphabetically.
This flag is intended for use by PDF writers, not by PDF
readers. PDF readers shall display the options in the order
in which they occur in the Opt array (see "Table 234 —
Additional entries specific to a choice field").
22                 MultiSelect              (PDF 1.4) If set, more than one of the field’s option items
may be selected simultaneously; if clear, at most one item
shall be selected.
23                 DoNotSpellCheck          (PDF 1.4) If set, text entered in the field shall not be spell-
checked. This flag shall not be used unless the Combo and
Edit flags are both set.
27                 CommitOnSelChange (PDF 1.5) If set, the new value shall be committed as soon as
a selection is made (commonly with the pointing device). In
this case, supplying a value for a field involves three actions:
selecting the field for fill-in, selecting a choice for the fill-in
value, and leaving that field, which finalizes or "commits"
the data choice and triggers any actions associated with the
entry or changing of this data. If this flag is on, then
processing does not wait for leaving the field action to
occur, but immediately proceeds to the third step.
This option enables applications to perform an action once a
selection is made, without requiring the user to exit the
field. If clear, the new value is not committed until the user
exits the field.
Table 234 — Additional entries specific to a choice field
Key       Type           Value
Opt       array          (Optional) An array of options that shall be presented to the user. Each
element of the array is either a text string representing one of the available
options or an array consisting of two text strings: the option’s export value
and the text that shall be displayed as the name of the option.
If this entry is not present, no choices should be presented to the user.
TI        integer        (Optional) For scrollable list boxes, the top index (the index in the Opt array
of the first option visible in the list). Default value: 0.
542                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type        Value
I          array       (Sometimes required, otherwise optional; PDF 1.4) For choice fields that allow
multiple selection (MultiSelect flag set), an array of integers, sorted in
ascending order, representing the zero-based indices in the Opt array of the
currently selected option items. This entry shall be used when two or more
elements in the Opt array have different names but the same export value or
when the value of the choice field is an array. If the items identified by this
entry differ from those in the V entry of the field dictionary (see discussion
following this Table), the V entry shall be used.
The Opt array specifies the list of options in the choice field, each of which shall be represented by a
text string that shall be displayed on the screen. Each element of the Opt array contains either this text
string by itself or a two-element array, whose second element is the text string and whose first element
is a text string representing the export value that shall be used when exporting interactive form field
data from the document.
The field dictionary’s V (value) entry (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries")
identifies the item or items currently selected in the choice field. If the field does not allow multiple
selection — that is, if the MultiSelect flag (PDF 1.4) is not set — or if multiple selection is supported but
only one item is currently selected, V is a text string representing the selected item, as given in the field
dictionary’s Opt array. If multiple items are selected, V is an array of such strings. (For items
represented in the Opt array by a two-element array, the name string is the second of the two array
elements.) The default value of V is null, indicating that no item is currently selected.
EXAMPLE           The following example shows a typical choice field definition.
<</FT /Ch
/Ff …
/T (Body Color)
/V (Blue)
/Opt [(Red)
(My favourite color)
(Blue)
]
>>
12.7.5.5          Signature fields
A signature field (PDF 1.3) is a form field that contains a digital signature (see 12.8, "Digital
signatures"). The field dictionary representing a signature field may contain the additional entries
listed in "Table 235 — Additional entries specific to a signature field", as well as the standard entries
described in "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries". The field type (FT) shall be Sig,
and the field value (V), if present, shall be a signature dictionary containing the signature and
specifying various attributes of the signature field (see "Table 255 — Entries in a signature
dictionary").
NOTE 1      This signature form field serves two primary purposes. The first is to define the form field that
provides the visual signing properties for display, and it can also hold information needed later
when the actual signing takes place, such as the signature technology to use. This carries
information from the author of the document to the software that later does the signing.
NOTE 2      Filling in (signing) the signature field entails updating at least the V entry and usually also the AP
entry of the associated widget annotation. Exporting a signature field typically exports the T, V,
and AP entries.
Like any other field, a signature field may be described by a widget annotation dictionary containing
entries pertaining to an annotation as well as a field (12.5.6.19, "Widget annotations"). The annotation
rectangle (Rect) in such a dictionary shall give the position of the field on its page. Signature fields that
are not intended to be visible shall have an annotation rectangle that has zero height and width. PDF
processors shall treat such signatures as not visible. PDF processors shall also treat signatures as not
visible if either the Hidden bit or the NoView bit of the F entry is true. The F entry is described in
"Table 166 — Entries common to all annotation dictionaries", and annotation flags are described in
"Table 167 — Annotation flags".
The location of a signature within a document can have a bearing on its legal meaning. For this reason,
signature fields shall never refer to more than one annotation.
NOTE 3      If more than one location is associated with a signature, the meaning can become ambiguous.
For signature fields that are visible, the appearance dictionary (AP) for the widget annotation of these
fields should be created at the time of signature creation. This dictionary defines the field’s visual
appearance on the page (see 12.5.5, "Appearance streams"), but the information included in the
appearance dictionary shall not be used by a signature verification handler at the time of signature
verification. It is there strictly for the purpose of providing a way for a human verifier to perform their
own verification of the visual representation. A PDF processor shall not incorporate the validation
status of a signature (e.g. a checkmark for passed or an X for failed) into the appearance of the
signature field.
Table 235 — Additional entries specific to a signature field
Key         Type         Value
Lock        dictionary   (Optional; shall be an indirect reference; PDF 1.5) A signature field lock
dictionary that specifies a set of form fields that shall be locked when this
signature field is signed. "Table 236 — Entries in a signature field lock
dictionary" lists the entries in this dictionary.
SV          dictionary   (Optional; shall be an indirect reference; PDF 1.5) A seed value dictionary
(see "Table 237 — Entries in a signature field seed value dictionary")
containing information that constrains the properties of a signature that
is applied to this field.
The signature field lock dictionary (described in "Table 236 — Entries in a signature field lock
dictionary") contains the names of form fields whose values shall no longer be changed after this
signature has been signed.
Table 236 — Entries in a signature field lock dictionary
Key         Type         Value
Type        name         (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be SigFieldLock for a signature field lock dictionary.
544                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type           Value
Action     name           (Required) A name which, in conjunction with Fields, indicates the set of
fields that should be locked. The value shall be one of the following:
All            All fields in the document
Include        All fields specified in Fields
Exclude        All fields except those specified in Fields
Fields     array          (Required if the value of Action is Include or Exclude) An array of text
strings containing field names.
P          number         (Optional; PDF 2.0) The access permissions granted for this document.
Valid values shall be:
1     No changes to the document are permitted; any change to the
document shall invalidate the signature.
2     Permitted changes shall be filling in forms, instantiating page
templates, and signing; other changes shall invalidate the signature.
3     Permitted changes are the same as for 2, as well as annotation
creation, deletion, and modification; other changes shall invalidate
the signature.
There is no default value; absence of this key shall result in no effect on
signature validation rules.
If MDP permission is already in effect from an earlier incremental save
section or the original part of the document, the number shall specify
permissions less than or equal to the permissions already in effect based
on signatures earlier in the document. That is, permissions can be denied
but not added. If the number specifies greater permissions than an MDP
value already in effect, the new number is ignored.
If the document does not have an author signature, the initial permissions
in effect are those based on the number 3.
The new permission applies to any incremental changes to the document
following the signature of which this key is part.
The value of the SV entry in the field dictionary is a seed value dictionary whose entries (see "Table
237 — Entries in a signature field seed value dictionary") provide constraining information that shall
be used at the time the signature is applied. The Ff entry in this signature field seed value dictionary
specifies whether the other entries in the dictionary shall be honoured or whether they are merely
recommendations.
Table 237 — Entries in a signature field seed value dictionary
Key                   Type            Value
Type                  name            (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be SV for a seed value dictionary.
Key            Type       Value
Ff             integer    (Optional) A set of bit flags specifying the interpretation of specific entries
in this dictionary. A value of 1 for the flag indicates that the associated entry
is a required constraint. A value of 0 indicates that the associated entry is
an optional constraint. Bit positions are 1 (Filter); 2 (SubFilter); 3 (V); 4
(Reasons); 5 (LegalAttestation); 6 (AddRevInfo); and 7 (DigestMethod).
For PDF 2.0 the following bit flags are added: 8 (Lockdocument); and 9
(AppearanceFilter). Default value: 0.
Filter         name       (Optional) The signature handler that shall be used to sign the signature
field. Beginning with PDF 1.7, if Filter is specified and the Ff entry indicates
this entry is a required constraint, then the signature handler specified by
this entry shall be used when signing; otherwise, signing shall not take
place. If Ff indicates that this is an optional constraint, this handler may be
used if it is available. If it is not available, a different handler may be used
instead.
SubFilter      array      (Optional) An array of names indicating encodings to use when signing. The
first name in the array that matches an encoding supported by the
signature handler shall be the encoding that is actually used for signing. If
SubFilter is specified and the Ff entry indicates that this entry is a required
constraint, then the first matching encodings shall be used when signing;
otherwise, signing shall not take place. If Ff indicates that this is an optional
constraint, then the first matching encoding shall be used if it is available. If
none is available, a different encoding may be used.
DigestMethod   array      (Optional; PDF 1.7) An array of names indicating acceptable digest
algorithms to use while signing. The value shall be one of SHA1 (deprecated
with PDF 2.0), SHA256, SHA384, SHA512 and RIPEMD160. The default value
is implementation-specific.
This property is only applicable if the digital credential signing contains
RSA public/private keys. If it contains DSA public/ private keys, the digest
algorithm is always SHA-1 and this attribute shall be ignored.
V              integer    (Optional) The minimum required capability of the signature field seed
value dictionary parser. A value of 1 specifies that the parser shall be able
to recognise all seed value dictionary entries in a PDF 1.5 file. A value of 2
specifies that it shall be able to recognise all seed value dictionary entries
specified. A value of 3 specifies that it shall be able to recognise all seed
value dictionary entries specified in PDF 2.0 and earlier.
The Ff entry indicates whether this shall be treated as a required
constraint.
Cert           dictionary (Optional) A certificate seed value dictionary (see "Table 238 — Entries in a
certificate seed value dictionary") containing information about the
characteristics of the certificate that shall be used when signing.
546                                                                                © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                   Type         Value
Reasons               array        (Optional) An array of text strings that specifying possible reasons for
signing a document. If specified, the reasons supplied in this entry replace
those used by interactive PDF processors.
If the Reasons array is provided and the Ff entry indicates that Reasons is
a required constraint, one of the reasons in the array shall be used for the
signature dictionary; otherwise, signing shall not take place. If the Ff entry
indicates Reasons is an optional constraint, one of the reasons in the array
may be chosen or a custom reason can be provided.
If the Reasons array is omitted or contains a single entry with the value
PERIOD (2Eh) and the Ff entry indicates that Reasons is a required
constraint, the Reason entry shall be omitted from the signature dictionary
(see "Table 255 — Entries in a signature dictionary").
MDP                   dictionary (Optional; PDF 1.6) A dictionary containing a single entry whose key is P
and whose value is an integer between 0 and 3. A value of 0 defines the
signature as an approval signature (see 12.8, "Digital signatures"). The
values 1 through 3 shall be used for certification signatures and correspond
to the value of P in a DocMDP transform parameters dictionary (see "Table
257 — Entries in the DocMDP transform parameters dictionary").
If this MDP key is not present or the MDP dictionary does not contain a P
entry, no rules shall be defined regarding the type of signature or its
permissions.
TimeStamp             dictionary (Optional; PDF 1.6) A timestamp dictionary containing two entries:
URL     An ASCII string specifying the URL of a timestamping server,
providing a timestamp that is compliant with Internet RFC 3161 as
updated by Internet RFC 5816.
Ff      An integer whose value is 1 (the signature shall have a timestamp)
or 0 (the signature need not have a timestamp). Default value: 0.
NOTE 1 Please see 12.8.3.3, "CMS (PKCS #7) signatures" for more details about
hashing.
LegalAttestation      array        (Optional; PDF 1.6) An array of text strings specifying possible legal
attestations (see 12.8.7, "Legal content attestations"). The value of the
corresponding flag in the Ff entry indicates whether this is a required
constraint.
Key                Type       Value
AddRevInfo         boolean    (Optional; PDF 1.7) A flag indicating whether revocation checking shall be
carried out. If AddRevInfo is true, the PDF processor shall perform the
following additional tasks when signing the signature field:
•    Perform revocation checking of the certificate (and the corresponding issuing
certificates) used to sign.
•    Include the revocation information within the signature value.
Three SubFilter values have been defined. For those values the
AddRevInfo value shall be true only if SubFilter is adbe.pkcs7.detached or
adbe.pkcs7.sha1. If SubFilter is adbe.x509.rsa_sha1, this entry shall be
omitted or set to false. Additional SubFilter values may be defined that also
use AddRevInfo values.
If AddRevInfo is true and the Ff entry indicates this is a required
constraint, then the preceding tasks shall be performed. If they cannot be
performed, then signing shall fail.
Default value: false
NOTE 2 Revocation information is carried in the signature data as specified by
PKCS #7. See 12.8.3.3, "CMS (PKCS #7) signatures".
NOTE 3 adbe.pkcs7.detached and adbe.pkcs7.sha1 are deprecated in PDF 2.0.
LockDocument       name       (Optional; PDF 2.0) A name value supplying the author’s intent for whether
the signing dialogue should allow the user to lock the document at the time
of signing. The value shall be one of true, false, and auto, as follows:
true     the document should be locked at the time of signing. If the Ff entry
indicates that LockDocument is not a required constraint, the user
may choose to override this at the time of signing; otherwise, the
document is locked after signing.
false    the document should not be locked after signing. Again, the
required flag, Ff, determines whether this is a required constraint.
auto     the consuming application decided whether to present the lock
user interface for the document and whether to honour the
required flag, Ff, based on the properties of the document.
Default value: auto
AppearanceFilter text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) A text string naming the appearance that shall be used
when signing the signature field. interactive PDF processors may choose to
maintain a list of named signature appearances. This text string provides
authors with a means of specifying which appearance should be used to
sign the signature field.
If the required bit AppearanceFilter in Ff is set, the appearance shall be
available to sign the document and is used.
A seed value dictionary may also include seed values for private entries belonging to multiple handlers.
A given handler shall use only those private entries that are pertinent to itself and ignore any other
private entries.
For optional keys that are not present, no constraint shall be placed upon the signature handler for that
property when signing.
548                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 238 — Entries in a certificate seed value dictionary
Key                                       Type            Value
Type                                      name            (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary
describes; if present, shall be SVCert for a certificate seed
value dictionary.
Ff                                        integer         (Optional) A set of bit flags specifying the interpretation of
specific entries in this dictionary. A value of 1 for the flag
means that a signer shall be required to use only the
specified values for the entry. A value of 0 means that
other values are permissible. Bit positions are 1 (Subject);
2 (Issuer); 3 (OID); 4 (SubjectDN); 5 (Reserved); 6
(KeyUsage); 7 (URL). Default value: 0.
Subject                                   array           (Optional) An array of byte strings containing DER-
encoded X.509v3 certificates that are acceptable for
signing. X.509v3 certificates are described in Internet RFC
5280. The value of the corresponding flag in the Ff entry
indicates whether this is a required constraint.
SignaturePolicyOID                        ASCII string (Optional: PDF 2.0) The string representation of the OID of
the signature policy to use when signing.
SignaturePolicyHashValue                  string          (Optional: PDF 2.0) The computed hash value of the
signature policy, computed the same way as hashValue of
sigPolicyHash in clause 5.2.9 of CAdES (ETSI EN 319 122-
1), according to the hash algorithm specified by
SignaturePolicyHashAlgorithm.
SignaturePolicyHashAlgorithm              name            (Optional: PDF 2.0) The hash function used to compute the
value of the SignaturePolicyHashValue entry. Entries
shall be represented the same way as SubFilter values
specified in "Table 260 — SubFilter value algorithm
support".
SignaturePolicyCommitmentType Array of                    (Optional: PDF 2.0) If the SignaturePolicyOID is present,
ASCII                       this array defines the commitment types that may be used
strings                     within the signature policy. An empty string may be used
to indicate that all commitments defined by the signature
policy may be used.
Key                   Type            Value
SubjectDN             array of     (Optional; PDF 1.7) An array of dictionaries, each
dictionaries specifying a Subject Distinguished Name (DN) that shall be
present within the certificate for it to be acceptable for
signing. The certificate ultimately used for the digital
signature shall contain all the attributes specified in each
of the dictionaries in this array. (PDF keys and values are
mapped to certificate attributes and values.) The certificate
is not constrained to use only attribute entries from these
dictionaries but may contain additional attributes. The
Subject Distinguished Name is described in Internet RFC
5280. The key can be any valid attribute identifier (OID).
Attribute names shall contain characters in the set a-z A-Z
0-9 and PERIOD.
Certificate attribute names are used as key names in the
dictionaries in this array. Values of the attributes are used
as values of the keys. Values shall be text strings.
The value of the corresponding flag in the Ff entry
indicates whether this entry is a required constraint.
KeyUsage              array of        (Optional; PDF 1.7) An array of ASCII strings, where each
ASCII           string specifies an acceptable key-usage extension that
Goto errata     strings         shall be present in the signing certificate. Multiple strings
specify a range of acceptable key-usage extensions. The
key-usage extension is described in Internet RFC 5280.
Each character in a string represents a key-usage type,
where the order of the characters indicates the key-usage
extension it represents. The first through ninth characters
in the string, from left to right, represent the required
value for the following key-usage extensions:
1     digitalSignature       4 dataEncipherment        7
cRLSign
2     non-Repudiation 5 keyAgreement                   8
encipherOnly
3     keyEncipherment 6 keyCertSign                    9
decipherOnly
Any additional characters shall be ignored. Any missing
characters or characters that are not one of the following
values, shall be treated as ‘X’. The following character
values shall be supported:
0     Corresponding key-usage shall not be set.
1     Corresponding key-usage shall be set.
X     State of the corresponding key-usage does not matter.
EXAMPLE 1          The string values ‘1’ and ‘1XXXXXXXX’
represent settings where the key-usage type
digitalSignature is set and the state of all other
key-usage types do not matter.
The value of the corresponding flag in the Ff entry
indicates whether this is a required constraint.
550                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                                       Type            Value
Issuer                                    array           (Optional) An array of byte strings containing DER-
encoded X.509v3 certificates of acceptable issuers. If the
signer’s certificate refers to any of the specified issuers
(either directly or indirectly), the certificate shall be
considered acceptable for signing. The value of the
corresponding flag in the Ff entry indicates whether this is
a required constraint.
This array may contain self-signed certificates.
OID                                       array           (Optional) An array of byte strings that contain Object
Identifiers (OIDs) of the certificate policies that shall be
present in the signing certificate.
EXAMPLE 2          An example of such a string is:
(2.16.840.1.113733.1.7.1.1)
This field shall only be used if the value of Issuer is not
empty. The certificate policies extension is described in
Internet RFC 5280. The value of the corresponding flag in
the Ff entry indicates whether this is a required constraint.
URL                                       ASCII string (Optional) A URL, the use for which shall be defined by the
URLType entry.
URLType                                   Name            (Optional; PDF 1.7) A name indicating the usage of the URL
entry. There are standard uses and there can be
implementation-specific uses for this URL. The following
value specifies a valid standard usage:
Browser – The URL references content that shall
be displayed in a web browser to allow enrolling
for a new credential if a matching credential is not
found. The Ff attribute’s URL bit shall be ignored
for this usage.
Third parties may extend the use of this attribute with
their own attribute values, which shall conform to the
guidelines described in Annex E, "Extending PDF".
The default value is Browser.
If the SignaturePolicyOID is absent, the SignaturePolicyHashValue,
SignaturePolicyHashAlgorithm and SignaturePolicyCommitmentType fields shall be ignored. If
the SignaturePolicyOID is present but the SignaturePolicyCommitmentType is absent, all
commitments defined by the signature policy may be used.
NOTE        The above entries allow the creation of a signature-policy-identifier as in CAdES (ETSI 319 122-
1). All rules defined in CAdES apply. In particular, CAdES allows the creation of a EPES signature
when the signature policy hash is not available, therefore, the absence of the
SignaturePolicyHashValue does not preclude the creation of a PAdES-EPES signature.
12.7.6           Form actions
12.7.6.1         General
Interactive forms also support special types of actions in addition to those described in 12.6.4, "Action
types":
•    submit-form action
•    reset-form action
•    import-data action
12.7.6.2         Submit-form action
Upon invocation of a submit-form action, an interactive PDF processor shall transmit the names and
values of selected interactive form fields to a specified uniform resource locator (URL).
NOTE         Presumably, the URL is the address of a Web server that will process them and send back a
response.
The value of the action dictionary’s Flags entry shall be an non-negative integer containing flags
specifying various characteristics of the action. Bit positions within the flag word shall be numbered
starting with 1 (low-order). "Table 240 — Flags for submit-form actions" shows the meanings of the
flags; all undefined flag bits shall be reserved and shall be set to 0.
Table 239 — Additional entries specific to a submit-form action
Key         Type          Value
S           name          (Required) The type of action that this dictionary describes; shall be
SubmitForm for a submit-form action.
F           file          (Required) A URL file specification (see 7.11.5, "URL specifications")
specification giving the uniform resource locator (URL) of the script at the Web server
that will process the submission.
Fields      array         (Optional) An array identifying which fields to include in the submission
or which to exclude, depending on the setting of the Include/Exclude flag
in the Flags entry (see "Table 240 — Flags for submit-form actions").
Each element of the array shall be either an indirect reference to a field
dictionary or (PDF 1.3) a text string representing the fully qualified name
of a field. Elements of both kinds may be mixed in the same array.
If this entry is omitted, the Include/Exclude flag shall be ignored, and all
fields in the document’s interactive form shall be submitted except those
whose NoExport flag (see "Table 227 — Field flags common to all field
types") is set. Fields with no values may also excluded, as dictated by the
value of the IncludeNoValueFields flag; see "Table 240 — Flags for
submit-form actions".
Flags       integer       (Optional; inheritable) A set of flags specifying various characteristics of
the action (see "Table 240 — Flags for submit-form actions"). Default
value: 0.
CharSet     string        (Optional; inheritable; PDF 2.0) Supported values include: utf-8, utf-16,
Shift-JIS, BigFive, GBK, or UHC.
552                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 240 — Flags for submit-form actions
Bit position       Name                       Meaning
1                  Include/Exclude            If clear, the Fields array (see "Table 239 — Additional entries
specific to a submit-form action") specifies which fields to
include in the submission. (All descendants of the specified
fields in the field hierarchy shall be submitted as well.)
If set, the Fields array tells which fields to exclude. All fields in
the document’s interactive form shall be submitted except
those listed in the Fields array and those whose NoExport flag
(see "Table 227 — Field flags common to all field types") is set
and fields with no values if the IncludeNoValueFields flag is
clear.
2                  IncludeNoValueFields If set, all fields designated by the Fields array and the
Include/Exclude flag shall be submitted, regardless of whether
they have a value (V entry in the field dictionary). For fields
without a value, only the field name shall be transmitted.
If clear, fields without a value shall not be submitted.
3                  ExportFormat               Meaningful only if the SubmitPDF and XFDF flags are clear. If
set, field names and values shall be submitted in HTML Form
format. If clear, they shall be submitted in Forms Data Format
(FDF); see 12.7.8, "Forms data format".
4                  GetMethod                  If set, field names and values shall be submitted using an
HTTP GET request. If clear, they shall be submitted using a
POST request. This flag is meaningful only when the
ExportFormat flag is set; if ExportFormat is clear, this flag
shall also be clear.
5                  SubmitCoordinates          If set, the coordinates of the mouse click that caused the
submit-form action shall be transmitted as part of the form
data. The coordinate values are relative to the upper-left
corner of the field’s widget annotation rectangle. They shall be
represented in the data in the format name . x = xval & name .
y = yval where name is the field’s mapping name (TM in the
field dictionary) if present; otherwise, name is the field name.
If the value of the TM entry is a single ASCII SPACE (20h)
character, both the name and the ASCII PERIOD (2Eh)
following it shall be suppressed, resulting in the format x =
xval & y = yval
This flag shall be used only when the ExportFormat flag is set.
If ExportFormat is clear, this flag shall also be clear.
6                  XFDF                       (PDF 1.4) shall be used only if the SubmitPDF flags are clear. If
set, field names and values shall be submitted as XFDF.
7                  IncludeAppendSaves         (PDF 1.4) shall be used only when the form is being submitted
in Forms Data Format (that is, when both the XFDF and
ExportFormat flags are clear). If set, the submitted FDF file
shall include the contents of all incremental updates to the
underlying PDF document, as contained in the Differences
entry in the FDF dictionary (see "Table 246 — Entries in the
FDF dictionary"). If clear, the incremental updates shall not be
included.
Bit position     Name                     Meaning
8                IncludeAnnotations       (PDF 1.4) shall be used only when the form is being submitted
in Forms Data Format (that is, when both the XFDF and
ExportFormat flags are clear). If set, the submitted FDF file
shall include includes all markup annotations in the
underlying PDF document (see 12.5.6.2, "Markup
annotations"). If clear, markup annotations shall not be
included.
9                SubmitPDF                (PDF 1.4) If set, the document shall be submitted as PDF, using
the MIME media type application/pdf as defined by Internet
RFC 8118. If set, all other flags shall be ignored except
GetMethod.
10               CanonicalFormat          (PDF 1.4) If set, any submitted field values representing dates
shall be converted to the standard format described in 7.9.4,
"Dates".
NOTE 1 The interpretation of a form field as a date is not specified
explicitly in the field itself but only in the ECMAScript code
that processes it.
11               ExclNonUserAnnots        (PDF 1.4) shall be used only when the form is being submitted
in Forms Data Format (that is, when both the XFDF and
ExportFormat flags are clear) and the IncludeAnnotations flag
is set. If set, it shall include only those markup annotations
whose T entry (see "Table 172 — Additional entries in an
annotation dictionary specific to markup annotations")
matches the name of the current user, as determined by the
remote server to which the form is being submitted.
NOTE 2 The T entry for markup annotations specifies the text label
that is displayed in the title bar of the annotation’s popup
window and is assumed to represent the name of the user
authoring the annotation.
NOTE 3 This allows multiple users to collaborate in annotating a
single remote PDF document without affecting one
another’s annotations.
12               ExclFKey                 (PDF 1.4) shall be used only when the form is being submitted
in Forms Data Format (that is, when both the XFDF and
ExportFormat flags are clear). If set, the submitted FDF shall
exclude the F entry.
14               EmbedForm                (PDF 1.5) shall be used only when the form is being submitted
in Forms Data Format (that is, when both the XFDF and
ExportFormat flags are clear). If set, the F entry of the
submitted FDF shall be a file specification containing an
embedded file stream representing the PDF file from which
the FDF is being submitted.
The set of fields whose names and values are to be submitted shall be defined by the Fields array in
the action dictionary ("Table 239 — Additional entries specific to a submit-form action") together with
the Include/Exclude and IncludeNoValueFields flags in the Flags entry ("Table 240 — Flags for submit-
form actions"). Each element of the Fields array shall identify an interactive form field, either by an
indirect reference to its field dictionary or (PDF 1.3) by its fully qualified field name (see 12.7.4.2,
554                                                                                © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
"Field names"). If the Include/Exclude flag is clear, the submission consists of all fields listed in the
Fields array, along with any descendants of those fields in the field hierarchy. If the Include/Exclude
flag is set, the submission shall consist of all fields in the document’s interactive form except those
listed in the Fields array.
The NoExport flag in the field dictionary’s Ff entry (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field
dictionaries" and "Table 227 — Field flags common to all field types") takes precedence over the
action’s Fields array and Include/ Exclude flag. Fields whose NoExport flag is set shall not be included
in a submit-form action.
Field names and values may be submitted in any of the following formats, depending on the settings of
the action’s ExportFormat, SubmitPDF, and XFDF flags:
•    HTML Form format (described in the HTML 4.01 Specification).
•    Forms Data Format (FDF), which is described in 12.7.8, "Forms data format".
•    XFDF, a version of FDF based on XML as defined by ISO 19444-1.
•    PDF (in this case, the entire document shall be submitted rather than individual fields and values).
The name submitted for each field shall be its fully qualified name (see 12.7.4.2, "Field names"), and
the value shall be specified by the V entry in its field dictionary.
For push-button fields submitted in FDF, the value submitted shall be that of the AP entry in the field’s
widget annotation dictionary. If the submit-form action dictionary contains no Fields entry, such push-
button fields shall not be submitted.
Fields with no value (that is, whose field dictionary does not contain a V entry) are ordinarily not
included in the submission. The submit-form action’s IncludeNoValueFields flag may override this
behaviour. If this flag is set, such valueless fields shall be included in the submission by name only, with
no associated value.
12.7.6.3          Reset-form action
Upon invocation of a reset-form action, an interactive PDF processor shall reset selected interactive
form fields to their default values; that is, it shall set the value of the V entry in the field dictionary to
that of the DV entry (see "Table 226 — Entries common to all field dictionaries"). If no default value is
defined for a field, its V entry shall be removed. For fields that can have no value (such as push-
buttons), the action has no effect. "Table 241 — Additional entries specific to a reset-form action"
shows the action dictionary entries specific to this type of action.
The value of the action dictionary’s Flags entry is a non-negative containing flags specifying various
characteristics of the action. Bit positions within the flag word shall be numbered starting from 1 (low-
order). Only one flag is defined for this type of action. All undefined flag bits shall be reserved and shall
be set to 0.
Table 241 — Additional entries specific to a reset-form action
Key               Type                    Value
S                 name                    (Required) The type of action that this dictionary describes;
shall be ResetForm for a reset-form action.
Fields            array                   (Optional) An array identifying which fields to reset or
which to exclude from resetting, depending on the setting
of the Include/ Exclude flag in the Flags entry (see "Table
242 — Flag for reset-form actions"). Each element of the
array shall be either an indirect reference to a field
dictionary or (PDF 1.3) a text string representing the fully
qualified name of a field. Elements of both kinds may be
mixed in the same array.
If this entry is omitted, the Include/Exclude flag shall be
ignored; all fields in the document’s interactive form are
reset.
Flags             integer                 (Optional; inheritable) A set of flags specifying various
characteristics of the action (see "Table 242 — Flag for
reset-form actions"). Default value: 0.
Table 242 — Flag for reset-form actions
Bit position Name                         Meaning
1             Include/Exclude             If clear, the Fields array (see "Table 241 — Additional
entries specific to a reset-form action") specifies which fields
to reset. (All descendants of the specified fields in the field
hierarchy are reset as well.) If set, the Fields array indicates
which fields to exclude from resetting; that is, all fields in the
document’s interactive form shall be reset except those listed
in the Fields array.
12.7.6.4       Import-data action
Upon invocation of an import-data action, a PDF processor shall import data (see “Table 243 —
Additional entries specific to an import-data action”) from Forms Data Format (FDF), XFDF (XML-
based Forms Data Format according to ISO 19444-1) or any other data format that it supports into the
document’s interactive form from a specified file.
Table 243 — Additional entries specific to an import-data action
Key      Type                   Value
S        name                   (Required) The type of action that this dictionary describes; shall be
ImportData for an import-data action.
F        file specification     (Required) The FDF, XFDF or any other data format file from which to
import the data.
556                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.7.7            Named pages
The optional Pages entry (PDF 1.3) in a document’s name dictionary (see 7.7.4, "Name dictionary")
contains a name tree that maps name strings to individual pages within the document. Naming a page
allows it to be referenced in two different ways:
•    An import-data action can add the named page to the document into which FDF is being imported,
either as a page or as a button appearance.
•    A script executed by an ECMAScript action can add the named page to the current document as a
regular page.
A named page that is intended to be visible to a user shall be left in the page tree (see 7.7.3, "Page
tree"), and there shall be a reference to it in the appropriate leaf node of the name dictionary’s Pages
tree. If the page is not intended to be displayed by the PDF processor, it shall be referenced from the
name dictionary’s Templates tree instead. Such invisible pages shall have an object type of Template
rather than Page and shall have no Parent or B entry (see "Table 31 — Entries in a page object").
12.7.8            Forms data format
12.7.8.1          General
This subclause describes Forms Data Format (FDF), the file format used for interactive form data (PDF
1.2). FDF can be used when submitting form data to a server, receiving the response, and incorporating
it into the interactive form. It can also be used to export form data to stand-alone files that can be
stored, transmitted electronically, and imported back into the corresponding PDF interactive form. In
addition, beginning in PDF 1.3, FDF can be used to define a container for annotations that are separate
from the PDF document to which they apply.
FDF is based on PDF; it uses the same syntax and has essentially the same file structure (7.5, "File
structure"). However, it differs from PDF in the following ways:
•    The cross-reference table (7.5.4, "Cross-reference table") is optional.
•    FDF files shall not be updated (see 7.5.6, "Incremental updates"). Objects shall only be of
generation 0, and no two objects within an FDF file shall have the same object number.
•    The document structure is much simpler than PDF, since the body of an FDF document consists of
only one required object.
•    The length of a stream shall not be specified by an indirect object.
FDF shall use the MIME media type application/vnd.fdf. On the Microsoft WindowsTM and UNIX
platforms, FDF files shall have the extension .fdf; on Mac OS, they shall have file type 'FDF'.
12.7.8.2          FDF file structure
12.7.8.2.1        General
An FDF file shall be structured in essentially the same way as a PDF file but contains only those
elements required for the export and import of interactive form and annotation data. It consists of
three required elements and one optional element (see "Figure 85 — FDF file structure"):
•    A one-line header identifying the version number of the PDF specification to which the file
conforms
•    A body containing the objects that make up the content of the file
•    An optional cross-reference table containing information about the indirect objects in the file
•    An optional trailer giving the location of the cross-reference table and of certain special objects
within the body of the file
Figure 85 — FDF file structure
12.7.8.2.2        FDF header
The first line of an FDF file shall be a header, which shall contain
%FDF-1.2
The version number is given by the Version entry in the FDF catalog dictionary (see 12.7.8.3, "FDF
catalog").
12.7.8.2.3        FDF body
The body of an FDF file shall consist of a sequence of indirect objects representing the file’s catalog
dictionary (see 12.7.8.3, "FDF catalog") and any additional objects that the catalog dictionary
references. The objects are of the same basic types described in 7.5, "File structure" (other than the
%PDF–n.m and %%EOF comments described in 7.5, "File structure") have no semantics. They are not
necessarily preserved by PDF processors. Just as in PDF, objects in FDF can be direct or indirect.
12.7.8.2.4        FDF trailer
The trailer of an FDF file enables an interactive PDF processor to find significant objects quickly within
the body of the file. The last line of the file contains only the end-of-file marker, %%EOF. This marker
shall be preceded by the FDF trailer dictionary, consisting of the keyword trailer followed by a series
558                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
of one or more key-value pairs enclosed in double angle brackets (<<…>>) (using LESS-THAN SIGNs
(3Ch) and GREATER-THAN SIGNs (3Eh)). The only required key is Root whose value shall be an
indirect reference to the file’s catalog dictionary (see "Table 244 — Entry in the FDF trailer
dictionary"). The trailer may optionally contain additional entries for objects that are referenced from
within the catalog dictionary.
Table 244 — Entry in the FDF trailer dictionary
Key         Type            Value
Root        dictionary      (Required; shall be an indirect reference) The catalog dictionary object
for this FDF file (see 12.7.8.3, "FDF catalog").
Thus, the trailer has the overall structure
trailer
<</Root c 0 R
key2 value2
…
keyn valuen
>>
%%EOF
where c is the object number of the file’s catalog dictionary.
12.7.8.3          FDF catalog
12.7.8.3.1        General
The root node of an FDF file’s object hierarchy is the catalog dictionary, located by means of the Root
entry in the file’s trailer dictionary (see 12.7.8.2.4, "FDF trailer"). As shown in "Table 245 — Entries in
the FDF catalog dictionary", the only required entry in the catalog dictionary is FDF; its value shall be
an FDF dictionary ("Table 246 — Entries in the FDF dictionary"), which in turn shall contain references
to other objects describing the file’s contents. The catalog dictionary may also contain an optional
Version entry identifying the version of the PDF specification to which this FDF file conforms. “Table
245 — Entries in the FDF catalog dictionary” describes the entries in the FDF catalog dictionary.
Table 245 — Entries in the FDF catalog dictionary
Key                    Type                  Value
Version                name                  (Optional; PDF 1.4) The version of the FDF specification to
which this FDF file conforms (for example, 1.4) if later
than the version specified in the file’s header (see
12.7.8.2.2, "FDF header"). If the header specifies a later
version, or if this entry is absent, the document conforms
to the version specified in the header.
The value of this entry is a name object, not a number, and
therefore shall be preceded by a slash character (/) when
written in the FDF file (for example, /1.4).
Key           Type                  Value
FDF           dictionary            (Required) The FDF dictionary for this file (see "Table 246
— Entries in the FDF dictionary").
Table 246 — Entries in the FDF dictionary
Key        Type                   Value
F          file specification (Optional) The source file or target file: the PDF document file that
this FDF file was exported from or is intended to be imported into.
ID         array                  (Optional) An array of two byte strings constituting a file identifier
(see 14.4, "File identifiers") for the source or target file designated
by F, taken from the ID entry in the file’s trailer dictionary (see
7.5.5, "File trailer").
Fields     array                  (Optional) An array of FDF field dictionaries (see 12.7.8.3.2, "FDF
fields" in 12.7.8.3, "FDF catalog") describing the root fields (those
with no ancestors in the field hierarchy) that shall be exported or
imported. This entry and the Pages entry shall not both be present.
Status     PDFDocEncoded (Optional) A status string that shall be displayed indicating the
string        result of an action, typically a submit-form action (see 12.7.6.2,
"Submit-form action"). The string shall be encoded with
PDFDocEncoding. This entry and the Pages entry shall not both be
present.
Pages      array                  (Optional; PDF 1.3) An array of FDF page dictionaries (see
12.7.8.3.3, "FDF pages") describing pages that shall be added to a
PDF target document. The Fields and Status entries shall not be
present together with this entry.
Encoding   name                   (Optional; PDF 1.3) The encoding that shall be used for any FDF
field value or option (V or Opt in the field dictionary; see "Table
249 — Entries in an FDF field dictionary") or field name that is a
string and does not begin with the Unicode prefix ZERO WIDTH
NO-BREAK SPACE (U+FEFF).
Default value: PDFDocEncoding.
Other allowed values include Shift_JIS, BigFive, GBK, UHC, utf_8,
utf_16
Annots     array                  (Optional; PDF 1.3) An array of FDF annotation dictionaries (see
12.7.8.3.4, "FDF annotation dictionaries" in 12.7.8.3, "FDF catalog").
The array may include annotations of any of the standard types
listed in "Table 171 — Annotation types" except Link, Movie,
Widget, PrinterMark, Screen, and TrapNet.
560                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                 Type                 Value
Differences         stream               (Optional; PDF 1.4) A stream containing all the bytes in all
incremental updates made to the underlying PDF document since it
was opened (see 7.5.6, "Incremental updates"). If a submit-form
action submitting the document to a remote server as FDF has its
IncludeAppendSaves flag set (see 12.7.6.2, "Submit-form action"),
the contents of this stream shall be included in the submission.
This allows any digital signatures (see 12.8, "Digital signatures") to
be transmitted to the server. An incremental update shall be
automatically performed just before the submission takes place, in
order to capture all changes made to the document.
The submission shall include the full set of incremental updates
back to the time the document was first opened, even if some of
them may already have been included in intervening submissions.
Although a Fields or Annots entry (or both) may be present along
with Differences, there is no requirement that their contents will
be consistent with each other. In particular, if Differences contains
a digital signature, only the values of the form fields given in the
Differences stream shall be considered trustworthy under that
signature.
Target              string               (Optional; PDF 1.4) The name of a browser frame in which the
underlying PDF document shall be opened. This mimics the
behaviour of the target attribute in HTML <href> tags.
EmbeddedFDFs array                       (Optional; PDF 1.4) An array of file specifications (see 7.11, "File
specifications") representing other FDF files embedded within this
one (7.11.4, "Embedded file streams").
JavaScript          dictionary           (Optional; PDF 1.4) An ECMAScript dictionary (see "Table 248 —
Entries in the ECMAScript dictionary") defining document-level
ECMAScript scripts.
Although deprecated in PDF 2.0, embedded FDF files specified in the FDF dictionary’s EmbeddedFDFs
entry may be encrypted. Besides the usual entries for an embedded file stream, the stream dictionary
representing such an encrypted FDF file shall contain the additional entry shown in "Table 247 —
Additional entry in an embedded file stream dictionary for an encrypted FDF file" to identify the
revision number of the FDF encryption algorithm used to encrypt the file. Although the FDF encryption
mechanism is separate from the one for PDF file encryption described in 7.6, "Encryption" revision 1
(the only one defined) uses a similar RC4 encryption algorithm based on a 40-bit encryption key. The
key shall be computed by means of an MD5 hash, using a padded user-supplied password as input. The
computation shall be identical to steps (a) and (b) of the "Algorithm 2: Computing a file encryption key
in order to encrypt a document (revision 4 and earlier)" in 7.6.4.3, "File encryption key algorithm"; the
first 5 bytes of the result shall be the file encryption key for the embedded FDF file.
Table 247 — Additional entry in an embedded file stream dictionary for an encrypted FDF file
Key                    Type       Value
EncryptionRevision     integer    (Required if the FDF file is encrypted; deprecated in PDF 2.0) The
revision number of the FDF encryption algorithm used to encrypt
the file. This value shall be 1.
The JavaScript entry in the FDF dictionary holds an ECMAScript dictionary containing ECMAScript
scripts that shall be defined globally at the document level, rather than associated with individual
fields. The dictionary may contain scripts defining ECMAScript functions for use by other scripts in the
document, as well as scripts that shall be executed immediately before and after the FDF file is
imported. "Table 248 — Entries in the ECMAScript dictionary" shows the contents of this dictionary.
Table 248 — Entries in the ECMAScript dictionary
Key                    Type               Value
Before                 text string or     (Optional) A text string or text stream containing an
text stream        ECMAScript script that shall be executed just before the FDF
file is imported.
After                  text string or     (Optional) A text string or text stream containing an
text stream        ECMAScript script that shall be executed just after the FDF file
is imported.
AfterPermsReady        text string or     (Optional; PDF 1.6) A text string or text stream containing an
text stream        ECMAScript script that shall be executed after the FDF file is
imported and the usage rights in the PDF document have been
determined (see 12.8.2.3, "UR").
Doc                    Array              (Optional) An array defining additional ECMAScript scripts that
shall be added to those defined in the JavaScript entry of the
document’s name dictionary (see 7.7.4, "Name dictionary").
The array shall contain an even number of elements, organised
in pairs. The first element of each pair shall be a name and the
second shall be a text string or text stream defining the script
corresponding to that name. Each of the defined scripts shall be
added to those already defined in the name dictionary and shall
then be executed before the script defined in the Before entry
is executed.
NOTE    As described in 12.6.4.17, "ECMAScript actions" these
scripts are used to define ECMAScript functions for use by
other scripts in the document.
12.7.8.3.2     FDF fields
Each field in an FDF file shall be described by an FDF field dictionary. "Table 249 — Entries in an FDF
field dictionary" shows the contents of this type of dictionary. Most of the entries have the same form
and meaning as the corresponding entries in a field dictionary ("Table 226 — Entries common to all
field dictionaries", "Table 228 — Additional entries common to all fields containing variable text",
"Table 232 — Additional entry specific to a text field", and "Table 234 — Additional entries specific to a
562                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
choice field") or a widget annotation dictionary ("Table 170 — Entries in an appearance dictionary"
and "Table 191 — Additional entries specific to a widget annotation"). Unless otherwise indicated in
the table, importing a field causes the values of the entries in the FDF field dictionary to replace those
of the corresponding entries in the field with the same fully qualified name in the target document.
Table 249 — Entries in an FDF field dictionary
Key       Type                Value
Kids      array               (Optional) An array containing the immediate children of this field.
Unlike the children of fields in a PDF file, which shall be specified as
indirect object references, those of an FDF field may be either direct or
indirect objects.
T         text string         (Required) The partial field name (see 12.7.4.2, "Field names").
V         (various)           (Optional) The field’s value, whose format varies depending on the field
type; see the descriptions of individual field types in 12.7.5, "Field types"
for further information.
Ff        integer             (Optional) A set of flags specifying various characteristics of the field (see
"Table 227 — Field flags common to all field types", "Table 229 — Field
flags specific to button fields", "Table 231 — Field flags specific to text
fields", and "Table 233 — Field flags specific to choice fields"). When
imported into an interactive form, the value of this entry shall replace that
of the Ff entry in the form’s corresponding field dictionary. If this field is
present, the SetFf and ClrFf entries, if any, shall be ignored.
SetFf     integer             (Optional) A set of flags to be set (turned on) in the Ff entry of the form’s
corresponding field dictionary. Bits equal to 1 in SetFf shall cause the
corresponding bits in Ff to be set to 1. This entry shall be ignored if an Ff
entry is present in the FDF field dictionary.
ClrFf     integer             (Optional) A set of flags to be cleared (turned off) in the Ff entry of the
form’s corresponding field dictionary. Bits equal to 1 in ClrFf shall cause
the corresponding bits in Ff to be set to 0. If a SetFf entry is also present in
the FDF field dictionary, it shall be applied before this entry. This entry
shall be ignored if an Ff entry is present in the FDF field dictionary.
F         integer             (Optional) A set of flags specifying various characteristics of the field’s
widget annotation (see 12.5.3, "Annotation flags"). When imported into an
interactive form, the value of this entry shall replace that of the F entry in
the form’s corresponding annotation dictionary. If this field is present, the
SetF and ClrF entries, if any, shall be ignored.
SetF      integer             (Optional) A set of flags to be set (turned on) in the F entry of the form’s
corresponding widget annotation dictionary. Bits equal to 1 in SetF shall
cause the corresponding bits in F to be set to 1. This entry shall be ignored
if an F entry is present in the FDF field dictionary.
ClrF      integer             (Optional) A set of flags to be cleared (turned off) in the F entry of the
form’s corresponding widget annotation dictionary. Bits equal to 1 in ClrF
shall cause the corresponding bits in F to be set to 0. If a SetF entry is also
present in the FDF field dictionary, it shall be applied before this entry.
This entry shall be ignored if an F entry is present in the FDF field
dictionary.
Key      Type              Value
AP       dictionary        (Optional) An appearance dictionary specifying the appearance of a push-
button field (see 12.7.5.2.2, "Push-buttons"). The appearance dictionary’s
contents are as shown in "Table 170 — Entries in an appearance
dictionary", except that the values of the N, R, and D entries shall all be
streams.
APRef    dictionary        (Optional; PDF 1.3) A dictionary holding references to external PDF files
containing the pages to use for the appearances of a push-button field.
This dictionary is similar to an appearance dictionary (see "Table 170 —
Entries in an appearance dictionary"), except that the values of the N, R,
and D entries shall all be named page reference dictionaries ("Table 253
— Entries in an FDF named page reference dictionary"). This entry shall
be ignored if an AP entry is present.
IF       dictionary        (Optional; PDF 1.3; button fields only) An icon fit dictionary (see "Table 250
— Entries in an icon fit dictionary") specifying how to display a button
field’s icon within the annotation rectangle of its widget annotation.
Opt      array             (Required; choice fields only) An array of options that shall be presented to
the user. Each element of the array shall take one of two forms:
A text string representing one of the available options
A two-element array consisting of a text string representing one of the
available options and a default appearance string for constructing the
item’s appearance dynamically at viewing time (12.7.4.3, "Variable text").
A        dictionary        (Optional) An action that shall be performed when this field’s widget
annotation is activated (see 12.6, "Actions").
AA       dictionary        (Optional) An additional-actions dictionary defining the field’s behaviour
in response to various trigger events (see 12.6.3, "Trigger events").
RV       text string or    (Optional; PDF 1.5) A rich text string, as in Adobe XML Architecture, XML
text stream       Forms Architecture (XFA) Specification, version 3.3.
In an FDF field dictionary representing a button field, the optional IF entry holds an icon fit dictionary
(PDF 1.3) specifying how to display the button’s icon within the annotation rectangle of its widget
annotation. "Table 250 — Entries in an icon fit dictionary" shows the contents of this type of
dictionary.
Table 250 — Entries in an icon fit dictionary
Key     Type         Value
SW      name         (Optional) The circumstances under which the icon shall be scaled inside the
annotation rectangle:
A    Always scale.
B    Scale only when the icon is bigger than the annotation rectangle.
S    Scale only when the icon is smaller than the annotation rectangle.
N Never scale.
Default value: A.
564                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key      Type            Value
S        name            (Optional) The type of scaling that shall be used:
A    Anamorphic scaling: Scale the icon to fill the annotation rectangle
exactly, without regard to its original aspect ratio (ratio of width to
height).
P    Proportional scaling: Scale the icon to fit the width or height of the
annotation rectangle while maintaining the icon’s original aspect ratio.
If the required horizontal and vertical scaling factors are different, use
the smaller of the two, centring the icon within the annotation
rectangle in the other dimension.
Default value: P.
A        array           (Optional) An array of two numbers that shall be between 0.0 and 1.0
indicating the fraction of leftover space to allocate at the left and bottom of
the icon. A value of [0.0 0.0] shall position the icon at the bottom-left corner
of the annotation rectangle. A value of [0.5 0.5] shall centre it within the
rectangle. This entry shall be used only if the icon is scaled proportionally.
Default value: [0.5 0.5].
FB       boolean         (Optional; PDF 1.5) If true, indicates that the button appearance shall be
scaled to fit fully within the bounds of the annotation without taking into
consideration the line width of the border. Default value: false.
12.7.8.3.3        FDF pages
The optional Pages field in an FDF dictionary (see "Table 246 — Entries in the FDF dictionary") shall
contain an array of FDF page dictionaries (PDF 1.3) describing new pages that shall be added to the
target document. "Table 251 — Entries in an FDF page dictionary" shows the contents of this type of
dictionary.
Table 251 — Entries in an FDF page dictionary
Key              Type            Value
Templates        array           (Required) An array of FDF template dictionaries (see "Table 252 —
Entries in an FDF template dictionary") that shall describe the named
pages that serve as templates on the page.
Info             dictionary      (Optional) An FDF page information dictionary that shall contain
additional information about the page.
An FDF template dictionary shall contain information describing a named page that serves as a
template. "Table 252 — Entries in an FDF template dictionary" shows the contents of this type of
dictionary.
Table 252 — Entries in an FDF template dictionary
Key           Type              Value
TRef          dictionary        (Required) A named page reference dictionary (see "Table 253 —
Entries in an FDF named page reference dictionary") that shall
specify the location of the template.
Fields        array             (Optional) An array of references to FDF field dictionaries (see "Table
249 — Entries in an FDF field dictionary") describing the root fields
that shall be imported (those with no ancestors in the field
hierarchy).
Rename        boolean           (Optional) A flag that shall specify whether fields imported from the
template shall be renamed in the event of name conflicts with
existing fields.
If this flag is true, fields with such conflicting names shall be renamed
to guarantee their uniqueness. If false, the fields shall not be
renamed; this results in multiple fields with the same name in the
target document. Each time the FDF file provides attributes for a
given field name, all fields with that name shall be updated. See the
Note in this subclause for further discussion.
Default value: true.
NOTE       The names of fields imported from a template can sometimes conflict with those of existing fields
in the target document. This can occur, for example, if the same template page is imported more
than once or if two different templates have fields with the same names.
Although the Rename flag does not define a renaming algorithm, this might be implemented by a PDF
processor renaming fields by prepending a page number, a template name, and an ordinal number to
the field name.
The TRef entry in an FDF template dictionary shall hold a named page reference dictionary that shall
describe the location of external templates or page elements. "Table 253 — Entries in an FDF named
page reference dictionary" shows the contents of this type of dictionary.
Table 253 — Entries in an FDF named page reference dictionary
Key        Type                    Value
Name       string                  (Required) The name of the referenced page.
F          file specification      (Optional) The file containing the named page. If this entry is
absent, it shall be assumed that the page resides in the associated
PDF file.
12.7.8.3.4      FDF annotation dictionaries
Each annotation dictionary in an FDF file shall have a Page entry (see "Table 254 — Additional entry
for annotation dictionaries in an FDF file") that shall indicate the page of the source document to which
the annotation is attached.
566                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 254 — Additional entry for annotation dictionaries in an FDF file
Key             Type               Value
Page            integer            (Required for annotations in FDF files) The ordinal page number on
which this annotation shall appear, where page 0 is the first page.
12.7.9            Non-interactive forms
Unlike interactive forms, non-interactive forms do not use widget annotations but are represented
with page content. Non-interactive forms are defined by the PrintField attrib0ute (14.8.5.6, "PrintField
attributes") for repurposing and accessibility purposes.
12.8 Digital signatures
12.8.1            General
A digital signature (PDF 1.3) may be used to verify the integrity of the document’s contents using
verification information related to a signer. The signature may be purely mathematical, such as a
public/private-key encrypted document digest, or it may be a biometric form of identification, such as
a handwritten signature, fingerprint, or retinal scan. The specific form of authentication used shall be
implemented by a special software module called a signature handler. Signature handlers shall be
identified in accordance with the rules defined in Annex E, "Extending PDF".
Digital signatures in PDF support four activities:
•    the addition of a digital signature to a document,
•    the verification of the validity of a signature added to a document,
•    the addition of DSS dictionaries and of validation related information (VRI) to allow for later
verifications (see 12.8.4.4, "Validation-related information (VRI)"), and
•    the addition of document timestamp dictionaries (DTS) to allow for later verifications (see 12.8.5,
"Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary").
PDF 2.0 processors should support digital signatures based on the Cryptographic Message Syntax
(CMS) and CAdES (ETSI EN 319 122).
Signature information shall be contained in a signature dictionary, whose entries are listed in "Table
255 — Entries in a signature dictionary". Signature handlers may use or omit those entries that are
marked optional in the table but should use them in a standard way if they are used at all. In addition,
signature handlers may add private entries of their own. To avoid name duplication, the keys for all
such private entries shall be prefixed with the registered handler name followed by a PERIOD (2Eh).
Signatures shall be created using an appropriate signature handler. That signature handler shall match
with the type of the signature that is intended to be created. It shall compute a digest using a
cryptographic hash function over the data of the document, and store it in the document.
To verify the signature, an appropriate signature handler is required. That signature handler shall
match with the type of the signature that has been created. The signer’s certificate shall be determined
and verified by the signature handler to match with any of the validation parameters and other
conditions. If the verification fails, the signature shall be considered invalid. The digest shall be re-
computed and compared with the one stored in the document. Differences between the two indicates
that modifications have been made since the document was signed and thus the signature shall be
considered invalid.
NOTE 1     If a signed document is modified and saved by incremental update (see 7.5.6, "Incremental
updates"), the data corresponding to the byte range of the original signature is preserved.
Therefore, if the signature is valid, the state of the document can be recreated as it existed at the
time of signing.
There are two defined techniques for computing a digital signature of the contents of a PDF file:
•    A byte range digest shall be computed over a range of bytes in the PDF file, that shall be indicated
by the ByteRange entry in the signature dictionary. This range should be the entire PDF file,
including the signature dictionary but excluding the signature value itself (the Contents entry). In
case of multiple digital signatures this range shall be the sequence of bytes starting from the
"%PDF-" comment at the beginning of the PDF document to the end of the "%%EOF" comment,
possibly followed by an optional EOL marker, terminating the incremental update that adds the
digital signature dictionary to the document. When a byte range digest is present, all values in the
signature dictionary shall be direct objects.
•    Additionally, modification detection may be specified by a signature reference dictionary. The
TransformMethod entry shall specify the general method for modification detection, and the
TransformParams entry shall specify the variable portions of the method.
A PDF document may contain the following standard types of signatures:
•    At most one usage rights signature (PDF 1.5, deprecated in PDF 2.0). It shall only be applied if no
other type of signature is already present. Its signature dictionary shall be referenced from the
UR3 (PDF 1.6) entry in the permissions dictionary, whose entries are listed in "Table 263 —
Entries in a permissions dictionary", (not from a signature field). The signature dictionary shall
contain a Reference entry whose value is a signature reference dictionary that has a UR
transform method. See 12.8.2.3, "UR" for information on how these signatures shall be created
and validated. When a usage rights signature is present, it is up to the PDF processor or to the
signature handler to process it or not.
•    At most one certification signature (also known as author signature) (PDF 1.5). The signature
dictionary of a certification signature shall be the value of a signature field and shall contain a
ByteRange entry. It may also be referenced from the DocMDP entry in the permissions
dictionary (see Table 263 — Entries in a permissions dictionary). The signature dictionary shall
contain a signature reference dictionary (see "Table 256 — Entries in a signature reference
dictionary") that has a DocMDP transform method. See 12.8.2.2, "DocMDP" for information on
how these signatures shall be created and validated.
•    One or more approval signatures (also known as recipient signatures). These shall follow the
certification signature if one is present. The signature dictionary of an approval signature shall be
the value of a signature field and shall contain a ByteRange entry.
NOTE 2     A signature dictionary for a certification or approval signature can also have a signature
reference dictionary with a FieldMDP transform method; see 12.8.2.4, "FieldMDP".
•    Any number of document timestamp signatures, see 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS)
dictionary". The timestamp signature dictionary of a document timestamp signature shall be the
value of a signature field and shall contain a ByteRange entry.
A signature dictionary is used by all of these types of signatures.
568                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 255 — Entries in a signature dictionary
Key                 Type           Value
Type                name           (Optional if Sig; Required if DocTimeStamp) The type of PDF object that this
dictionary describes; if present, shall be Sig for a signature dictionary or
DocTimeStamp for a timestamp signature dictionary.
The default value is: Sig.
Filter              name           (Required; inheritable) The name of the preferred signature handler to use
when validating this signature. If the Prop_Build entry is not present, it shall
be also the name of the signature handler that was used to create the
signature. If Prop_Build is present, it may be used to determine the name of
the handler that created the signature (which is typically the same as Filter
but is not needed to be). A PDF processor may substitute a different handler
when verifying the signature, as long as it supports the specified SubFilter
format. Example signature handlers are Adobe.PPKLite, Entrust.PPKEF,
CICI.SignIt, and VeriSign.PPKVS. The name of the filter (i.e. signature handler)
shall be identified in accordance with the rules defined in Annex E, "Extending
PDF".
SubFilter           name           (Optional) A name that describes the encoding of the signature value and key
information in the signature dictionary. A PDF processor may use any handler
that supports this format to validate the signature.
(PDF 1.6) The following values for public-key cryptographic signatures should
be used: adbe.x509.rsa_sha1, adbe.pkcs7.detached, adbe.pkcs7.sha1,
ETSI.CAdES.detached (PDF 2.0) and ETSI.RFC3161 (PDF 2.0).
(PDF 2.0) When the Type of this dictionary is DocTimeStamp, the SubFilter
value should be ETSI.RFC3161 and when the Type of this dictionary is Sig
(possibly by default) any of the values may be used except ETSI.RFC3161 (see
12.8.3, "Signature interoperability"). Other values may be defined by
developers, and when used, shall be prefixed with the registered developer
identification. All prefix names shall be registered (see Annex E, "Extending
PDF"). The prefix "adbe" and the prefix "ETSI" have been registered by Adobe
Systems and ETSI, respectively, and the subfilter names listed above and
defined in 12.8.3, "Signature interoperability" and 12.8.5, "Document
timestamp (DTS) dictionary" may be used by any developer.
The values adbe.x509.rsa_sha1 and adbe.pkcs7.sha1 have been deprecated
with PDF 2.0. To support backward compatibility, PDF readers should process
these values for this key, but PDF writers shall not use this value for this key.
Contents            byte           (Required) The signature value. When ByteRange is present, the value shall
string         be a hexadecimal string (see 7.3.4.3, "Hexadecimal strings") representing the
value of the byte range digest.
For public-key signatures, Contents should be either a DER-encoded PKCS #1
binary data object, a DER-encoded CMS binary data object or a DER-encoded
CMS SignedData binary data object.
For document timestamp signatures, Contents shall be the TimeStampToken
as specified in Internet RFC 3161 as updated by Internet RFC 5816. The value
of the messageImprint field within the TimeStampToken shall be a hash of
the bytes of the document indicated by the ByteRange and the ByteRange
shall specify the complete PDF file contents (excepting the Contents value).
Space for the Contents value shall be allocated before the message digest is
computed (see 7.3.4, "String objects").
Key          Type        Value
Cert         byte        (Required when SubFilter is adbe.x509.rsa_sha1) An array of byte strings that
string or   shall represent the X.509 certificate chain used when signing and verifying
array       signatures that use public-key cryptography, or a byte string if the chain has
only one entry. The signing certificate shall appear first in the array; it shall be
used to verify the signature value in Contents, and the other certificates shall
be used to verify the authenticity of the signing certificate.
If SubFilter is adbe.pkcs7.detached or adbe.pkcs7.sha1, this entry shall not be
used, and the certificate chain shall be put in the CMS envelope in Contents.
If SubFilter is ETSI.CAdES.detached or ETSI.RFC3161, this entry shall not be
used, and the certificate chain shall be put in the DER-encoded CMS
SignedData object in Contents.
ByteRange   array       (Required for all signatures that are part of a signature field and usage rights
signatures referenced from the UR3 entry in the permissions dictionary; shall be
direct objects) An array of pairs of integers (starting byte offset, length in
bytes) that shall describe the exact byte range for the digest calculation.
Multiple discontiguous byte ranges shall be used to describe a digest that does
not include the signature value (the Contents entry) itself.
If SubFilter is ETSI.CAdES.detached or ETSI.RFC3161, the ByteRange shall
cover the entire PDF file, including the signature dictionary but excluding the
Contents value.
When a byte range digest is present, all values in the signature dictionary shall
be direct objects.
Reference    array       (Optional; PDF 1.5) An array of signature reference dictionaries (see "Table
256 — Entries in a signature reference dictionary"). If SubFilter is
ETSI.RFC3161, this entry shall not be used.
Changes      array       (Optional) An array of three integers that shall specify changes to the
document that have been made between the previous signature and this
signature: in this order, the number of pages altered, the number of fields
altered, and the number of fields filled in.
The ordering of signatures shall be determined by the value of ByteRange.
Since each signature results in an incremental save, later signatures have a
greater length value.
If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry shall not be used.
Name         text string (Optional) The name of the person or authority signing the document. This
value should be used only when it is not possible to extract the name from the
signature.
EXAMPLE 1          From the certificate of the signer.
If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry should not be used and should be
ignored by a PDF processor.
570                                                                                  © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                 Type         Value
M                   date         (Optional) The time of signing. Depending on the signature handler, this may
be a normal unverified computer time or a time generated in a verifiable way
from a secure time server.
This value should be used only when the time of signing is not available in the
signature. If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry should not be used and
should be ignored by a PDF processor.
EXAMPLE 2          A timestamp can be embedded in a CMS binary data object (see
12.8.3.3, "CMS (PKCS #7) signatures").
Location            text string (Optional) The CPU host name or physical location of the signing. If SubFilter
is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry should not be used and should be ignored by a PDF
processor.
Reason              text string (Optional) The reason for the signing, such as ( I agree…). If SubFilter is
ETSI.RFC3161, this entry should not be used and should be ignored by a PDF
processor.
ContactInfo         text string (Optional) Information provided by the signer to enable a recipient to contact
the signer to verify the signature. If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry
should not be used and should be ignored by a PDF processor.
EXAMPLE 3          A phone number.
R                   integer      (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) The version of the signature handler that
was used to create the signature. (PDF 1.5) This entry shall not be used, and
the information shall be stored in the Prop_Build dictionary.
V                   integer      (Optional; PDF 1.5) The version of the signature dictionary format. It
corresponds to the usage of the signature dictionary in the context of the
value of SubFilter. The value is 1 if the Reference dictionary shall be
considered critical to the validation of the signature.
If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this V value shall be 0 (possibly by default).
Default value: 0.
Prop_Build          dictionary (Optional; PDF 1.5) A dictionary that may be used by a signature handler to
record information that captures the state of the computer environment used
for signing, such as the name of the handler used to create the signature,
software build date, version, and operating system.
The use of this dictionary is defined by Adobe PDF Signature Build Dictionary
Specification, which provides implementation guidelines.
Prop_AuthTime integer            (Optional; PDF 1.5) The number of seconds since the signer was last
authenticated, used in claims of signature repudiation. It should be omitted if
the value is unknown. If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry shall not be
used.
Prop_AuthType name               (Optional; PDF 1.5) The method that shall be used to authenticate the signer,
used in claims of signature repudiation. Valid values shall be PIN, Password,
and Fingerprint. If SubFilter is ETSI.RFC3161, this entry shall not be used.
NOTE 3      The entries in the signature dictionary can be conceptualized as being in different dictionaries;
they are in one dictionary for historical and cryptographic reasons. The categories are signature
properties (R, M, Name, Reason, Location, Prop_Build, Prop_AuthTime, and
Prop_AuthType); key information (Cert and portions of Contents when the signature value is a
CMS object, CMS object, or a document timestamp token); reference (Reference and
ByteRange); and signature value (Contents when the signature value is a PKCS #1 object).
Table 256 — Entries in a signature reference dictionary
Key                    Type          Value
Type                   name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary
describes; if present, shall be SigRef for a signature
reference dictionary.
TransformMethod        name          (Required) The name of the transform method (see 12.8.2,
"Transform methods") that shall guide the modification
analysis that takes place when the signature is validated.
Valid values shall be:
DocMDP         Used to detect modifications to a document
relative to a signature field that is signed by
the originator of a document; see 12.8.2.2,
"DocMDP"
UR             (Deprecated in PDF 2.0) Used to detect
modifications to a document that would
invalidate a signature in a rights-enabled
document; see 12.8.2.3, "UR"
FieldMDP       Used to detect modifications to a list of form
fields specified in TransformParams; see
12.8.2.4, "FieldMDP"
TransformParams        dictionary    (Optional) A dictionary specifying transform parameters
(variable data) for the transform method specified by
TransformMethod. Each method takes its own set of
parameters. See each of the subclauses specified
previously for details on the individual transform
parameter dictionaries.
Data                   (various)     (Required when TransformMethod is FieldMDP, shall be
an indirect reference) An indirect reference to the object in
the document upon which the object modification analysis
should be performed. For transform methods other than
FieldMDP, this object is implicitly defined.
DigestMethod           name          (Required) A name identifying the algorithm that shall be
used when computing the digest if not specified in the
certificate. Valid values are MD5, SHA1 SHA256, SHA384,
SHA512 and RIPEMD160.
NOTE      (2020) The use of MD5 and SHA1 are deprecated with
PDF 2.0. The DigestMethod key was also corrected to
be required as no default value is defined.
Default value for PDF 1.5-1.7: MD5.
572                                                                                  © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.8.2            Transform methods
12.8.2.1          General
Transform methods, along with transform parameters, shall determine which objects are included and
excluded in revision comparison. The following subclauses discuss the types of transform methods,
their transform parameters, and when they shall be used.
12.8.2.2          DocMDP
12.8.2.2.1        General
The DocMDP transform method shall be used to detect modifications relative to a signature field that
is signed by the author of a document (the person applying a certification signature). A document can
contain only one signature field that contains a DocMDP transform method. It enables the author to
specify what changes shall be permitted to be made to the document and what changes invalidate the
author’s signature.
NOTE        As discussed earlier, "MDP" stands for Modification Detection and Prevention. Certification
signatures that use the DocMDP transform method enable detection of disallowed changes
specified by the author. In addition, disallowed changes can also be prevented when the
signature dictionary is referred to by the DocMDP entry in the permissions dictionary (see
"Table 263 — Entries in a permissions dictionary").
A certification signature should have a legal attestation dictionary (see 12.8.7, "Legal content
attestations") that specifies all content that might result in unexpected rendering of the document
contents, along with the author’s attestation to such content. This dictionary may be used to establish
an author’s intent if the integrity of the document is questioned.
The P entry in the DocMDP transform parameters dictionary (see "Table 257 — Entries in the
DocMDP transform parameters dictionary") shall indicate the author’s specification of which changes
to the document will invalidate the signature. (These changes to the document shall also be prevented
if the signature dictionary is referred from the DocMDP entry in the permissions dictionary.) A value
of 1 for P indicates that the document shall be final; that is, any changes shall invalidate the signature
with the exception of subsequent DSS (see 12.8.4.3, "Document Security Store (DSS)") and/or
document timestamp (see 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary") incremental updates. The
values 2 and 3 shall permit modifications that are appropriate for form field or comment workflows as
well as subsequent DSS and/or document timestamp incremental updates.
12.8.2.2.2        Validating signatures that use the DocMDP transform method
To validate a signature that uses the DocMDP transform method, a PDF processor first shall verify the
byte range digest. Next, it shall verify that any modifications that have been made to the document are
permitted by the transform parameters.
Once the byte range digest is validated, the portion of the document specified by the ByteRange entry
in the signature dictionary (see "Table 255 — Entries in a signature dictionary") is known to
correspond to the state of the document at the time of signing. Therefore, PDF processors may
compare the signed and current versions of the document to see whether there have been
modifications to any objects that are not permitted by the transform parameters.
Table 257 — Entries in the DocMDP transform parameters dictionary
Key         Type      Value
Type        name      (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be TransformParams for a transform parameters dictionary.
P           number    (Optional) The access permissions granted for this document. Changes to
a PDF that are incremental updates which include only the data necessary
to add DSS’s 12.8.4.3, "Document Security Store (DSS)" and/or document
timestamps 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary" to the
document shall not be considered as changes to the document as defined
in the choices below.
Valid values shall be:
1    No changes to the document shall be permitted; any change to the
document shall invalidate the signature.
2    Permitted changes shall be filling in forms, instantiating page
templates, and signing; other changes shall invalidate the signature.
3    Permitted changes shall be the same as for 2, as well as annotation
creation, deletion, and modification; other changes shall invalidate
the signature.
Default value: 2.
V           name      (Optional) The DocMDP transform parameters dictionary version. The
only valid value shall be 1.2.
NOTE    This value is a name object, not a number.
Default value: 1.2.
12.8.2.3        UR
The features described in this subclause are deprecated with PDF 2.0.
The UR transform method (deprecated in PDF 2.0) shall be used to detect changes to a document that
shall invalidate a usage rights signature, which is referred to from the UR3 entry in the permissions
dictionary (see "Table 263 — Entries in a permissions dictionary"). The transform parameters
dictionary (see "Table 258 — Entries in the UR transform parameters dictionary") specifies the
additional rights that shall be enabled if the signature is valid. If the signature is invalid because the
document has been modified in a way that is not permitted or the identity of the signer is not granted
the extended permissions, additional rights shall not be granted.
A PDF processor that modifies a PDF, with a UR signature in excess of the rights that are granted by
that signature, should remove that signature prior to writing the newly modified PDF.
UR3 (PDF 1.6, deprecated in PDF 2.0): The ByteRange entry in the signature dictionary (see "Table 255
— Entries in a signature dictionary") shall be present. First, a PDF processor shall verify the byte range
digest to determine whether the portion of the document specified by ByteRange corresponds to the
state of the document at the time of signing. Next, a PDF processor shall examine the current version of
the document to see whether there have been modifications to any objects that are not permitted by
the transform parameters.
574                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 258 — Entries in the UR transform parameters dictionary
Key             Type        Value
Type            name        (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be TransformParams for a transform parameters dictionary.
Document        array       (Optional) An array of names specifying additional document-wide usage
rights for the document. The only defined value shall be FullSave, which
permits a user to save the document along with modified form and/or
annotation data. (PDF 1.5) Any usage right that permits the document to
be modified implicitly shall enable the FullSave right.
If the PDF document contains a UR3 dictionary, only rights specified by
the Annots entry that permit the document to be modified shall implicitly
enable the FullSave right. For all other rights, FullSave shall be explicitly
enabled in order to save the document. (Signature rights shall permit
saving as part of the signing process but not otherwise).
Msg             text        (Optional) A text string that may be used to specify any arbitrary
string      information, such as the reason for adding usage rights to the document.
V               name        (Optional) The UR transform parameters dictionary version. The value
shall be 2.2. If an unknown version is present, no rights shall be enabled.
NOTE     This value is a name object, not a number.
Default value: 2.2.
Annots          array       (Optional) An array of names specifying additional annotation-related
usage rights for the document. Valid names (PDF 1.5) are Create, Delete,
Modify, Copy, Import, and Export, which shall permit the user to perform
the named operation on annotations.
The following names (PDF 1.6) are also permitted (see "Table 263 —
Entries in a permissions dictionary"):
Online            Permits online commenting; that is, the ability to upload
or download markup annotations from a server.
SummaryView Permits a user interface to be shown that summarises the
comments (markup annotations) in a document.
Key          Type      Value
Form         array     (Optional) An array of names specifying additional form-field-related
usage rights for the document. Valid names (PDF 1.5) are:
Add                  Permits the user to add form fields to the document.
Delete               Permits the user to delete form fields to the
document.
FillIn               Permits the user to save a document on which form
fill-in has been done.
Import               Permits the user to import form data files in FDF,
XFDF and text (CSV/TSV) formats.
Export               Permits the user to export form data files as FDF or
XFDF.
SubmitStandalone Permits the user to submit form data when the
document is not open in a Web browser.
SpawnTemplate        Permits new pages to be instantiated from named
page templates.
The following names (PDF 1.6) are also valid:
BarcodePlaintext Permits text form field data to be encoded as a
plaintext two-dimensional barcode.
Online               Permits the use of forms-specific online mechanisms
such as SOAP or Active Data Object.
Signature    array     (Optional) An array of names specifying additional signature-related
usage rights for the document. The only defined value shall be Modify,
which permits a user to apply a digital signature to an existing signature
form field or clear a signed signature form field.
EF           array     (Optional; PDF 1.6) An array of names specifying additional usage rights
for named embedded files in the document. Valid names shall be Create,
Delete, Modify, and Import, which shall permit the user to perform the
named operation on named embedded files.
P            boolean   (Optional; PDF 1.6) If false, any possible restriction may be ignored.
Default value: false.
12.8.2.4       FieldMDP
The FieldMDP transform method shall be used to detect changes to the values of a list of form fields.
The entries in its transform parameters dictionary are listed in "Table 259 — Entries in the FieldMDP
transform parameters dictionary".
Table 259 — Entries in the FieldMDP transform parameters dictionary
Key        Type       Value
Type       name       (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be TransformParams for a transform parameters dictionary.
576                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key         Type       Value
Action      name       (Required) A name that, along with the Fields array, describes which form
fields do not permit changes after the signature is applied.
Valid values shall be:
All           All form fields.
Include       Only those form fields specified in Fields.
Exclude       Only those form fields not specified in Fields.
Fields      array      (Required if Action is Include or Exclude) An array of text strings
containing field names.
V           name       (Optional; required for PDF 1.5 and later) The transform parameters
dictionary version. The value for PDF 1.5 and later shall be 1.2.
NOTE     This value is a name object, not a number.
Default value: 1.2.
On behalf of a document author creating a document containing both form fields and signatures the
following shall be supported by PDF writers:
•   The author specifies that form fields shall be filled in without invalidating the approval or
certification signature. The P entry of the DocMDP transform parameters dictionary shall be set
to either 2 or 3 (see "Table 257 — Entries in the DocMDP transform parameters dictionary").
•   The author can also specify that after a specific recipient has signed the document, any
modifications to specific form fields shall invalidate that recipient’s signature. There shall be a
separate signature field for each designated recipient, each having an associated signature field
lock dictionary (see "Table 236 — Entries in a signature field lock dictionary") specifying the form
fields that shall be locked for that user.
•   When the recipient signs the field, the signature, signature reference, and transform parameters
dictionaries shall be created. The Action and Fields entries in the transform parameters
dictionary shall be copied from the corresponding fields in the signature field lock dictionary.
NOTE       This copying is done because all objects in a signature dictionary are direct objects if the
dictionary contains a byte range signature. Therefore, the transform parameters dictionary
cannot reference the signature field lock dictionary indirectly.
FieldMDP signatures shall be validated in a similar manner to DocMDP signatures. See 12.8.2.2.2,
"Validating signatures that use the DocMDP transform method" for details.
12.8.3          Signature interoperability
12.8.3.1        General
It is intended that PDF processors allow interoperability between signature handlers; that is, a PDF file
signed with a handler from one vendor should be able to be validated with a handler from a different
vendor when they use the same set of validation parameters. PDF 2.0 defines new signature formats
for PAdES signatures (PDF Advanced Electronic Signatures) as defined by ETSI EN 319 142-1 and ETSI
EN 319 142-2.
If present, the SubFilter entry in the signature dictionary shall specify the encoding of the signature
value and key information, while the Filter entry shall specify the preferred handler that should be
used to validate the signature. When handlers are being registered according to Annex E, "Extending
PDF" they shall specify the SubFilter encodings they support enabling handlers other than the
preferred handler to validate the signatures that the preferred handler creates.
There are several defined values for the SubFilter entry, all based on public-key cryptographic
standards published by RSA Security and also as part of the standards issued by the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) Public Key Infrastructure (PKIX) working group and the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). PDF 2.0 introduced Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
Algorithm (ECDSA) support as defined by Internet RFC 5480.
"Table 260 — SubFilter value algorithm support" shows an overview of the SubFilter values along
with the algorithms that are supported for each SubFilter.
Table 260 — SubFilter value algorithm support
SubFilter values            adbe.pkcs7.detached,             adbe.pkcs7.sha1c               adbe.x509.rsa_sha1a
ETSI.CAdES.detached or
ETSI.RFC3161
Message Digest              SHA1 (PDF 1.3) d                 SHA1 (PDF 1.3)b                SHA1 (PDF 1.3)
SHA256 (PDF 1.6)                                                SHA256 (PDF 1.6)
SHA384 (PDF 1.7)                                                SHA384 (PDF 1.7)
SHA512 (PDF 1.7)                                                SHA512 (PDF 1.7)
RIPEMD160 (PDF 1.7)                                             RIPEMD160 (PDF 1.7)
RSA Algorithm Support       Up to 1024-bit (PDF 1.3)         See adbe.pkcs7.detached        See adbe.pkcs7.detached
Up to 2048-bit (PDF 1.5)
Up to 4096-bit (PDF 1.5)
DSA Algorithm Support       Up to 4096-bits (PDF 1.6)        See adbe.pkcs7.detached        No
ECDSA Algorithm Support ANSI X9.62, Elliptic Curve           No                             No
(defined by Internet RFC Digital Signature Algorithm
5480)                    (ECDSA) (PDF 2.0)
a Despite the appearance of sha1 in the name of this SubFilter value, supported encodings shall not be limited
to the SHA-1 algorithm. The PKCS #1 object contains an identifier that indicates which algorithm shall be used.
b Other digest algorithms may be used to digest the signed-data field; however, SHA-1 shall be used to digest
the data that is being signed.
c The values adbe.x509.rsa_sha1 and adbe.pkcs7.sha1 have been deprecated with PDF 2.0.
d SHA1 has been deprecated with PDF 2.0.
12.8.3.2         PKCS #1 signatures
The PKCS #1 standard supports several public-key cryptographic algorithms and digest methods,
including RSA encryption, DSA signatures, and SHA-1 and MD5 digests. For signing PDF files using
PKCS #1, the only value of SubFilter that should be used is adbe.x509.rsa_sha1, which uses the RSA
encryption algorithm and SHA-1 digest method. The certificate chain of the signer shall be stored in the
Cert entry. PKCS #1 signatures are deprecated with PDF 2.0.
578                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.8.3.3          CMS (PKCS #7) signatures
12.8.3.3.1        General
When CMS signatures are used, the value of Contents shall be a DER-encoded CMS binary data object
containing the signature.
For byte range signatures, Contents shall be a hexadecimal string with "<" and ">" delimiters. It shall
fit precisely in the space between the ranges specified by ByteRange. Since the length of CMS objects is
not entirely predictable, the value of Contents shall be padded with zeros at the end of the string
(before the ">" delimiter) before writing the CMS to the allocated space in the PDF file.
The CMS object shall conform to Internet RFC 5652. Different SubFilter values may be used and shall
be registered in accordance with Annex E, "Extending PDF". SubFilter shall take one of the following
values:
•    adbe.pkcs7.detached: The original signed message digest over the document’s byte range shall be
incorporated as the normal CMS SignedData field. No data shall be encapsulated in the CMS
SignedData field.
•    adbe.pkcs7.sha1: The SHA-1 digest of the document’s byte range shall be encapsulated in the CMS
SignedData field with ContentInfo of type Data. The digest of that SignedData shall be
incorporated as the normal CMS digest. The value adbe.pkcs7.sha1 for the SubFilter key has been
deprecated with PDF 2.0. To support backward compatibility, PDF readers should process this
value for this key, but PDF writers shall not use this value.
At minimum the CMS object shall include the signer’s X.509 signing certificate. This certificate shall be
used to verify the signature value in Contents.
If the signature handler has on-line access, it may place into the CMS object time stamping information
and/or revocation information.
NOTE        Since PDF 2.0 supports two additional dictionaries, i.e. the DSS and the DTS dictionaries,
revocation information can be better placed in a DSS dictionary while time-stamping information
can also be placed in a DTS dictionary, in addition to being placed in the CMS object.
In such a case, the CMS object should contain the following:
•    Timestamp information as an unsigned attribute (PDF 1.6): The timestamp token shall conform to
Internet RFC 3161 as updated by Internet RFC 5816, and shall be computed and embedded into the
CMS object as described in Appendix A of Internet RFC 3161 as updated by Internet RFC 5816. The
specific treatment of this timestamp tokens and its processing is left to the particular signature
handlers to define.
•    Revocation information as a signed attribute (PDF 1.6): This attribute may include all the
revocation information that is necessary to carry out revocation checks for the signer's certificate
and its issuer certificates. Since revocation information is a signed attribute, it shall be obtained
before the computation of the digital signature. This means that the software used by the signer
should be able to construct the certification path and the associated revocation information. If one
of the elements cannot be obtained (e.g. no connection is possible), a signature with this attribute
will not be possible.
•    The signature handler should capture the chain of certificates, including the signer certificate,
along with the other certificates in the certificate chain, before signing. The signature handler
should validate the certificate's chain before signing. However, if this is not possible, the DSS (see
12.8.4.3, "Document Security Store (DSS)") may be used for adding the information as an
incremental update. This differs from the treatment when using adbe.x509.rsa_sha1 when the
certificates shall be placed in the Cert key of the signature dictionary as defined in "Table 260 —
SubFilter value algorithm support".
•    One or more Internet RFC 5755 attribute certificates associated with the signer certificate (PDF
1.7). The specific treatment of attribute certificates and their processing is left to the particular
signature handlers to define.
The policy of how to establish trusted identity lists to validate embedded certificates is up to the
validation signature handler.
12.8.3.3.2      Revocation of CMS-based signatures
For signatures with a SubFilter value other than ETSI.CAdES.detached, the following rules apply.
The adbe Revocation Information attribute object identifier is specified as follows using ASN.1
notation:
adbe-revocationInfoArchival OBJECT IDENTIFIER::=
{adbe(1.2.840.113583) acrobat(1) security(1) 8}
The value of the revocation information attribute may include any of the following data types:
•    Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs), described in Internet RFC 5280.
NOTE       CRLs can be large and therefore require more pre-allocated space in the value of the Contents
key.
•    Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) Responses, described in Internet RFC 6960. These are
generally small and should be the data type included in the CMS object.
•    Custom revocation information: The format is not prescribed by this specification, other than that
it be encoded as an OCTET STRING. The application should be able to determine the type of data
contained within the OCTET STRING by looking at the associated OBJECT IDENTIFIER.
The ASN.1 type of adbe's Revocation Information attribute value is RevocationInfoArchival defined as
follows using ASN.1 notation:
RevocationInfoArchival::= SEQUENCE {
crl          [0] EXPLICIT SEQUENCE of CRLs, OPTIONAL
ocsp         [1] EXPLICIT SEQUENCE of OCSPResponse, OPTIONAL
otherRevInfo [2] EXPLICIT SEQUENCE of OtherRevInfo, OPTIONAL
}
OtherRevInfo::= SEQUENCE {Type OBJECT IDENTIFIER
Value OCTET STRING
}
12.8.3.4        CAdES signatures as used in PDF
12.8.3.4.1      General
The Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)(see Internet RFC 5652) is used by CAdES signatures. The
PDF signatures using the SubFilter value ETSI.CAdES.detached are referred to as PAdES signatures and
they follow one of two CMS profiles created to be compatible with the corresponding CAdES profiles
defined in ETSI EN 319 122. Combined with 12.8.4, "Long term validation of signatures" and 12.8.5,
"Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary" as described in ETSI EN 319 142-1 (PAdES), compatibility
with additional CAdES profiles can be achieved.
580                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.8.3.4.2      Signature dictionary for PAdES signatures
When the SubFilter value is ETSI.CAdES.detached, the value of Contents shall be a DER-encoded CMS
SignedData binary data object containing the signature. The signature dictionary shall follow the
specification given in 12.7.5.5, "Signature fields" with the following additional restrictions/constraints:
•   The ByteRange shall cover the entire PDF file, including the signature dictionary but excluding
the Contents entry.
•   The signature dictionary shall not contain a Cert entry.
•   Either the time of signing may be indicated by the value of the M entry in the signature dictionary
or the signing-time attribute may be used, but not both.
12.8.3.4.3      Attributes for PAdES signatures
The attributes in the SignedData object used as the value of the signature dictionary Contents key shall
obey the following rules:
a) content-type: shall be present and shall always have the value "id-data".
b) Signature timestamp: A timestamp from a trusted timestamp server should be present as a unsigned
attribute. The timestamp should be applied on the digital signature immediately after the signature is
created so the timestamp specifies a time as close as possible to the time at which the document was
signed. The rules from clause 5.3 in ETSI EN 319 122-1 shall apply.
c) content timestamp: may be present. If the content timestamp attribute is present, it shall be used in the
same way as defined in clause 5.2.8 in ETSI EN 319 122-1.
d) exactly one single SignerInfo attribute shall be present.
e) message-digest: shall be present and shall be used as defined in CMS (Internet RFC 5652).
f) signing-certificate or signing-certificate-v2: shall be used as a signed attribute as described in the ESS
signing-certificate attribute or as described in the ESS signing-certificate-v2 attribute as defined in clause
5.2.2 in ETSI EN 319 122-1. The details of the signing certificate attribute are defined in Internet RFC
5035.
g) signing-time: may be present. If present, it contains a UTC time. If the signing-time attribute is present,
the time of signing shall not be indicated by the value of the M entry in the signature dictionary.
h) signer-location, as defined in clause 5.2.5 in ETSI EN 319 122-1, may be present. In such a case, the
Location entry in the signature dictionary shall not be present.
i) these attributes shall not be used: counter-signature, content-reference, content-identifier, and content-
hints.
j) signer-attributes-v2: may be used and shall follow the definition given in clause 5.2.6.1 of ETSI EN 319
122-1.
k) Unsigned signature attributes not explicitly noted here may be ignored.
12.8.3.4.4      Profiles of ETSI.CAdES.detached
The signatures using the SubFilter value ETSI.CAdES.detached may follow one of two profiles denoted
as PAdES-E-BES (Basic Electronic Signature) and PAdES-E-EPES (Explicit Policy Electronic Signature).
These are defined to be compatible with the corresponding profiles defined in ETSI EN 319 122-2 (i.e.,
CAdES-E-BES and CAdES-E-EPES, respectively). These two CMS profiles are also denoted as PAdES-E-
BES (Basic Electronic Signature) and PAdES-E-PES (Explicit Policy Electronic Signature) in ETSI EN
319 142-2. If discrepancies exist between this document and those of ETSI, this document shall prevail.
The following attributes may be present within the CMS SignedData object depending on the profile
employed:
For both the PAdES-E-BES and the PAdES-E-PES profiles:
•    If a commitment-type-indication attribute is present, a Reason entry shall not be used
•    If a commitment-type-indication attribute is not present, a Reason entry may be used
NOTE 2     The commitment-type-indication attribute contains an OID, whereas the entry Reason of the
signature dictionary contains a text string which is language dependent.
For the PAdES-E-EPES profile,
•    a signature-policy-identifier shall be present as a signed attribute. The rules from clause 5.2.9 in
CAdES (ETSI EN 319 122-1) shall apply. The parameters of the signature policy shall take
precedence over the seed values defined in 12.7.5.5, "Signature fields". Conforming signature
handlers should enforce seed value constraints at signing time, if not overridden, and should
enforce signature policies constraints at signing time when possible. During validation
conforming signature handlers should not enforce seed values constraints, if present, but shall
enforce signature policy constraints.
NOTE 3     It is important not to confuse the EPES defined attribute parameters with the "seed values"
defined in clause 12.7.5.5, "Signature fields". While both bear similarities, seed values are
workflow constraints for a given document, whereas signature policies represent general
endorsement rules agreed upon by the signer and the verifier.
Further CAdES-T compatible capabilities may be provided after the time of the signature using one of
the following methods:
•    with the addition, by the signer, of a timestamp attribute within its signature when sufficient
space has been prepared for it (see ETSI EN 319 122).
•    with the addition, by the verifier, of a timestamp token that applies to the PDF document as a
whole (see 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary").
In both cases, this demonstrates that the signer’s signature was created before the UTC time contained
in the timestamp token.
All signed attributes shall be checked for proper values by signature validation software.
12.8.3.4.5      Requirements for validation of PAdES signatures
For all profiles of PAdES signatures covered in this document (i.e., those with a SubFilter value of
ETSI.CAdES.detached), when the user opens a signed document or requests verification of these
signatures present in the PDF, a PDF processor, as the verifier, shall perform the following steps to
verify them:
a) A signature handler shall compare the hash value of the signer's certificate, with the hash value
given in the signing-certificate attribute or the signing-certificate-v2 attribute. If the hashes do not
match, then the signature is considered invalid. The signature handler shall use the public key
contained in the signer's certificate to verify that the document digest found in the signature is
correctly signed. If this is not the case, then the signature is considered invalid.
b) The signature handler shall validate the path of certificates used to verify the binding between the
subject distinguished name and subject public key as specified in Internet RFC 5280 clause 6, using
a set of validation parameters. The signature may be verified against a time other than the current
582                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
time if all validation information (e.g. certificates and revocation information) is known to have
existed at that time (e.g. using DSS (see 12.8.4.3, "Document Security Store (DSS)"); using
document timestamps, (see 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary"); or a signature
timestamp is present in the signature as an unsigned attribute (see 12.8.3.4.3, "Attributes for
PAdES signatures")). Otherwise, the local current time converted into the UTC shall be used.
NOTE        The claimed signing time specified by the signature dictionary value with the key M is not a
trusted indication of the signing time.
c) When the signer's signature is verified against a time indicated in a timestamp token present in a
Document timestamp dictionary, then the signature handler shall also validate the path of
certificates used to verify the timestamp unit's certificate, as specified in Internet RFC 5280 clause
6, using a set of validation parameters which may be different from the previous one.
d) The revocation status of the certification path shall be checked as specified in 12.8.3.4.6, "Signature
revocation checking model for PAdES signatures".
12.8.3.4.6        Signature revocation checking model for PAdES signatures
A signature handler shall use either, or both, of the following methods to check the revocation status of
every certificate belonging to a certification path:
•    Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs) obtained from Certification Authorities (CAs) or CRL Issuers
that are identified using a set of validation parameters. Using a CRL, the certificate in question
shall be checked against a list of revoked certificates.
NOTE 1      In addition to the certificate issue date and the issuing entities, the CRL specifies revoked
certificates and can also specify the reasons for revocation. Each CRL also contains a date at the
latest for the next release.
•    Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responses for obtaining the revocation status of a given
certificate from trusted network servers that are identified using a set of validation parameters.
For the verification of a signer's signature at a time located before the expiry of the signer's certificate,
two cases need to be considered:
1. the current UTC time, or
2. a UTC time in the past, when a timestamp token is present as an unsigned attribute of this
signature or of the signature which covers this signature or of the document timestamp which
covers this signature.
NOTE 2      For a verification of a signer's signature after the expiry of the signer's certificate, see 12.8.4,
"Long term validation of signatures".
12.8.3.4.7        Revocation checking PAdES signatures at the current time
When the signer's signature is verified at the current UTC time, such verification shall be done before
the expiry of the signer's certificate. The revocation of each certificate from the certification path of the
signer's certificate shall be checked.
When CRLs are being used, a CRL is appropriate only if the current UTC time is included within the
time period delimited by the thisUpdate and the nextUpdate fields of the CRL being used.
When OCSP responses are being used, an OCSP response is appropriate only if it has been captured
before the expiry of the signer's certificate.
NOTE       Such checking is adequate for a data origin authentication service but not for a non-repudiation
service, since after a successful validation done at one time, another validation done at a later
time will provide a validation failure if one of the certificates from the certification path happens
to be subsequently revoked.
12.8.3.4.8      Revocation checking PAdES signatures at a time in the past
When a timestamp token is already present in the CAdES signature as a signature timestamp attribute
(it is an unsigned attribute), the signer's signature shall be verified at the UTC time in the past
indicated in that token. The revocation status of each certificate from the certification path of the
signer's certificate shall be checked at that UTC time, as well as the revocation status of each certificate
from the certification path of the timestamping unit's certificate.
NOTE       When there is no valid timestamp token present in the CAdES signature, revocation checking at
a time in the past is addressed in 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary".
When CRLs are being used, a CRL is appropriate only if the two following conditions apply:
•    the CRL has been captured before the expiry of the signer's certificate, and
•    the time indicated in the nextUpdate field from the CRL is located after the UTC time in the past.
When OCSP responses are being used, an OCSP response is appropriate only if the two following
conditions apply:
•    the OCSP response has been captured before the expiry of the signer's certificate, and
•    the time indicated in the producedAt field from the OCSP response is located after the UTC time in
the past.
The following explanations only apply when the certificate of the timestamping unit that has produced
the timestamp token has not yet expired at the time of the verification. The scenario when it has
expired is addressed in 12.8.5.3, "Subsequent document timestamp dictionaries".
The reason for the revocation of a timestamping certificate and of every CA certificate belonging to the
certification path shall be indicated either in the CRLs or in the OCSP responses that are being used.
The revocation status of each certificate of the certification path of the timestamping unit's certificate
shall be checked at the current UTC time (i.e. not at a time in the past):
•    If no certificate has been revoked, then the UTC time included in the timestamp token can be
considered as reliable.
•    If a certificate has been revoked for a reason which is either "keyCompromise" or
"cACompromise" or if the revocation reason is missing, then the UTC time included in the
timestamp token cannot be considered as reliable and the time indicated in the timestamp token
cannot be used. The benefits of the timestamp token are then lost and revocation checking should
thus be done at the current time (see 12.8.3.4.6, "Signature revocation checking model for PAdES
signatures").
•    If a certificate has been revoked for any other reason than "keyCompromise" or "cACompromise",
then the UTC time included in the timestamp token can be considered as reliable (and is thus
usable) only if the time of the revocation of that timestamping unit's certificate occurred after the
UTC time included in the timestamp token. Otherwise, revocation checking should be done at the
current time (see 12.8.3.4.6, "Signature revocation checking model for PAdES signatures").
584                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.8.4          Long term validation of signatures
12.8.4.1        General
Long term validation (LTV) of signatures is achieved by using two types of dictionaries:
•   document security store (DSS) dictionaries, and
•   document timestamp dictionaries (DTS) (see 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary").
12.8.4.2        Introduction to the document security store (DSS)
A PDF signature may not be successfully verified unless its collateral validation components are
preserved, e.g., certificates, CRLs, timestamp tokens, revocation lists, and OCSP responses. To facilitate
long term signature validation, PDF supports the ability to collect validation information to verify a
signature at a later time if it has been verified once as being valid. Some of this information, i.e.
certificates, CRLs and OCSP responses, when not already present in the signature, shall be stored in a
document security store (DSS), see 12.8.4.3, "Document Security Store (DSS)". This will provide the
information needed to verify a signature as this was done when that signature was first verified.
Without an authoritative timestamp token, a signature handler is not able to verify a signature at a date
in the past to get the same validation result.
To allow this verification, one of the following is required:
•   a signature timestamp attribute (which contains a timestamp token), or
•   a timestamp token that applies to the PDF document as a whole (see 12.8.5, "Document
timestamp (DTS) dictionary").
When that timestamp token is already present in the CAdES signature (see 12.8.3.4.7, "Revocation
checking PAdES signatures at the current time") and if that timestamp token is valid, then the UTC time
included in that timestamp token shall be used as the time reference to check the revocation status of
the signer's certificate and of all the intermediate CA certificates, up to a trusted root. Afterwards, the
DSS dictionary shall be used to collect the certificates, CRLs and OCSP responses that are relevant to
validate that signature.
When there is no valid timestamp token present in the CAdES signature, or when such a timestamp
token is present but is considered as invalid, the DSS dictionary shall be used to collect the certificates,
CRLs and OCSP responses that are relevant to validate that signature and afterwards a timestamp
token that applies to the PDF document as a whole shall be used and placed in a Document timestamp
dictionary (DTS) as noted in 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary").
A timestamp token is itself signed. The case where the certificate of the timestamping unit which has
issued that timestamp token has expired is addressed in 12.8.5.3, "Subsequent document timestamp
dictionaries".
A timestamp token is itself signed, and so it is possible for the timestamp token's own validation data
also to be preserved. As with signatures from the signer(s) of the document, a DSS dictionary may also
include signature validation data relating to the timestamp token contained in a signature-timestamp
attribute or to document timestamps, see 12.8.5, "Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary").
The DSS supports the ability to add this critical information after the signed document has been
created and before this information is no longer available. At the time of signing, all of the collateral
validation components may not be available for various reasons including the inability to connect to
remote servers that provide them (e.g. the user is offline) or the inability of the signer to bear the
financial or time costs associated with obtaining these components. Also, in many workflows it is the
recipient of a signed PDF document who is interested in a long term validation of the signatures and
not the signer of the document.
The relevant validation data for each signature may be identified from the security store using a VRI
dictionary (see 12.8.4.4, "Validation-related information (VRI)") for optimisation or to remove
ambiguity of the validation data used to validate a specific signature.
NOTE         A benefit of using a DSS dictionary is that those components which are common to several
signatures (e.g. certificates and revocation lists) can be stored in this dictionary once and
referenced where ever they are needed. This can greatly reduce the size of a PDF document that
contains several signatures.
12.8.4.3         Document Security Store (DSS)
The document security store (DSS), when present, shall be a dictionary that shall be the value of a DSS
key in the document catalog dictionary (see 7.7.2, "Document catalog dictionary"). This dictionary may
contain:
•    an array of all certificates used for the signatures, including timestamp signatures, that occur in
the document. It shall also hold all the auxiliary certificates required to validate the certificates
participating in certificate chain validations.
•    an array of all Certificate Revocation Lists (CRL) (see Internet RFC 5280) used for some of the
signatures, and
•    an array of all Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) responses (see Internet RFC 6960) used for some
of the signatures.
•    a VRI key whose value shall be a dictionary containing one VRI dictionary (validation-related
information) for each signature represented in CMS format.
Any VRI dictionaries, if present, shall be located in document incremental update sections. If the
signature dictionary to which a VRI dictionary applies is itself in an incremental update section, the
DSS/VRI update shall be done later than the signature update. The inclusion of VRI dictionary entries
is optional. All validation material referenced in VRI entries is included in DSS entries too.
“Table 261 — Entries in the document security store (DSS) dictionary” shows the entries in the DSS
dictionary.
Table 261 — Entries in the document security store (DSS) dictionary
Key         Type         Value
Type        name         (Optional) If present, shall be DSS for a document security store
dictionary.
VRI         dictionary   (Optional) This dictionary contains Signature VRI dictionaries (see
12.8.4.4, "Validation-related information (VRI)"). The key of each entry in
this dictionary is the base-16-encoded (uppercase) SHA-1 digest of the
signature to which it appliesa and the value is the Signature VRI dictionary
which contains the validation-related information for that signature.
586                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key          Type            Value
Certs        array           (Optional) An array of indirect reference to streams, each containing one
DER-encoded X.509 certificate (see Internet RFC 5280). This array
contains certificates that may be used in the validation of any signatures
in the document.
OCSPs        array           (Optional) An array of indirect references to streams, each containing a
DER-encoded Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) response (see
Internet RFC 6960). This array contains OCSPs that may be used in the
validation of the signatures in the document.
CRLs         array           (Optional) An array of indirect references to streams, each containing a
DER-encoded Certificate Revocation List (CRL) (see Internet RFC 5280).
This array contains CRLs that may be used in the validation of the
signatures in the document.
a For a document signature or document timestamp signatures, the bytes that are hashed are those
of the complete hexadecimal string, including zero padding, in the Contents entry of the associated
signature dictionary, containing the signature's DER-encoded binary data object (e.g. CMS or CAdES
objects).
For the signatures of CRLs and OCSP responses, the bytes that are hashed are the respective signature
object represented as a BER-encoded OCTET STRING encoded with primitive encoding.
12.8.4.4          Validation-related information (VRI)
A signature VRI dictionary shall contain validation-related information (VRI) for one signature in the
document that a given signature handler or PDF processor has used to successfully validate the given
signature. A signature VRI dictionary shall reference:
•    a selection of certificates (Cert) from the certificates list (Certs) in the DSS dictionary applicable to
this signature;
•    a selection of CRLs from the CRL list in the DSS dictionary applicable to this signature, if any;
•    a selection of OCSP responses from the OCSP response list in the DSS dictionary applicable to
this signature.
If any of the Cert, CRL or OCSP arrays is empty that entry in the dictionary shall be omitted.
A VRI dictionary may also contain the time at which the data placed in the VRI dictionary was created
or/and a timestamp token which contains the UTC time at which the VRI dictionary was created.
A signature VRI dictionary shall not be used to record the information used in an unsuccessful
validation attempt. “Table 262 — Entries in the signature validation-related information (VRI)
dictionary” shows the entries in the VRI dictionary.
Table 262 — Entries in the signature validation-related information (VRI) dictionary
Key       Type      Value
Type      name      (Optional) If present, shall be VRI for a validation-related information
dictionary.
Key      Type    Value
Cert     array   (Optional) An array of (indirect references to) streams, each containing one
DER-encoded X.509 certificate (see Internet RFC 5280). This array contains
certificates that were used in the validation of this signature.
CRL      array   (Required, if a CRL is present) An array of indirect references to streams that are
all CRLs used to determine the validity of the certificates in the chains related to
this signature. Each stream shall reference a CRL that is an entry in the CRLs
array in the DSS dictionary.
OCSP     array   (Required, if an OCSP is present) An array of indirect references to streams that
are all OCSPs used to determine the validity of the certificates in the chains
related to this signature. Each stream shall reference an OCSP that is an entry in
the OCSPs array in the DSS dictionary.
TU       date    (Optional) The date/time at which this signature VRI dictionary was created. TU
shall be a date string as defined in 7.9.4, "Dates".
TS       stream (Optional) A stream containing the DER-encoded timestamp (see Internet RFC
3161 as updated by Internet RFC 5816) that contains the date/time at which this
signature VRI dictionary was created.
NOTE 1 The date/time contained in the timestamp token can be used for audit
purposes.
NOTE 2 The hash value to be contained in the timestamp token is left undefined. For
PKCS #7 signatures the datum that is hashed and included in the
messageImprint field of the DER encoded timestamp stored in the TS entry
(see Internet RFC 3161 as updated by Internet RFC 5816) is the
encryptedDigest field in the signature's PKC S#7 object (as defined in Internet
RFC 2315).
EXAMPLE 1     DSS dictionary (and associated objects)
100 0 obj
<<
/Type /Catalog
/DSS 101 0 R
… other stuff here …
>>
endobj
101 0 obj
<<
/VRI 102 0 R
/OCSPs [103 0 R]
/CRLs [104 0 R]
/Certs [105 0 R 106 0 R]
>>
endobj
102 0 obj
<<
/4B783B9A6D0D69E4E881BFDF080835E896735416            <</OCSP [103 0 R] /CRL [104 0 R]>>
>>
endobj
103 0 obj
<<
/Length …                           %whatever the length of the stream is
>>
stream
588                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
… OCSP data goes here …
endstream
104 0 obj
<<
/Length …                                %whatever the length of the stream is
>>
stream
… %CRL data goes here …
endstream
105 0 obj
<<
/Length …                                %whatever the length of the stream is
>>
stream
… Certificate data goes here …
endstream
106 0 obj
<<
/Length …                                %whatever the length of the stream is
>>
stream
… Certificate data goes here …
endstream
EXAMPLE 2          DSS sample with Two Signatures
101 0 obj
<<
/VRI 102 0 R
/OCSPs [103 0 R 107 0 R]
/CRLs [104 0 R]
/Certs [105 0 R 106 0 R]
>>
endobj
102 0 obj
<<
/4B783B9A6D0D69E4E881BFDF080835E896735416                     <</OCSP [103 0 R] /CRL [104 0 R]>>
/123456789ABCDEF987654321FEDCBA1234567890                     <</OCSP [107 0 R]>>
>>
107 0 obj
<<
/Length …                                %whatever the length of the stream is
>>
stream
… OCSP data goes here …
endstream
12.8.4.5           Usage of the DSS VRI
The validation data contained in the DSS dictionary and those embedded in the signature itself may be
used by another party later relying on the signature. The applicability of the validation data in the
signature VRI dictionary is subject to external conditions such as a set of validation parameters. In the
presence of DSS in a PDF document the preferred order of the search for validation data should be as
follows:
a) Validation data referenced in the VRI dictionary
b) Validation data in DSS
c) Validation data embedded in the signature.
12.8.5          Document timestamp (DTS) dictionary
12.8.5.1        General
A document timestamp dictionary establishes the exact contents of the complete PDF file at the time
indicated in the timestamp token.
12.8.5.2        Initial document timestamp dictionary
The timestamp token shall be an Internet RFC 3161 TimeStampToken, as updated by Internet RFC 5816,
obtained from a trusted timestamp authority. A Document Timestamp dictionary is a standard
signature dictionary as described in "Table 255 — Entries in a signature dictionary".
The ByteRange key shall cover the entire PDF file, including the signature dictionary but excluding the
Contents value. The hash value computed over that byte range shall be sent to a timestamping
authority and the TimeStampToken which is received shall be placed in the Contents key.
The existence of one or more document timestamps shall be determined by examining signature fields
(see 12.7.5.5, "Signature fields"). A document level timestamp is treated as a digital signature in most
respects. It normally would not have any visual appearance within the document content.
NOTE       When a document level timestamp is validated, using the same procedures as for other
signatures using its own set of validation parameters, one can determine that the contents of the
document have not been changed since a given past date.
12.8.5.3        Subsequent document timestamp dictionaries
A timestamp token present either in a signature timestamp attribute or in a document timestamp
dictionary may expire due to the expiry of its certificate or the cryptographic strength of some of their
algorithms may not be resistant any longer to some new cryptographic attack.
It is thus necessary to apply a new timestamp token before the expiry of the certificate and/or before a
cryptographic attack may succeed but it is also necessary to be able to demonstrate that the certificates
related to the certification path of the timestamp authority certificate were not revoked for a reason
which is either "keyCompromise" or "cACompromise" at the time when the new timestamp token has
been applied to the document.
The certificates, CRLs or OCSP responses used to demonstrate that the certificates related to the
certification path of the previous timestamp token was not revoked for a reason which is either
"keyCompromise" or "cACompromise" just before the time the new timestamp token has been
requested shall be included into the DSS dictionary.
Then the new timestamp token shall be placed into a new document timestamp dictionary which will
protect the whole structure.
590                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
The process may be repeated several times as long as there is a need to reverify the signatures
included in the document. “Figure 86 — Illustration of a PDF document with repeated LTV” illustrates
a PDF document with repeated LTV.
Figure 86 — Illustration of a PDF document with repeated LTV
When evaluating the DocMDP restrictions (see 12.8.2.2, "DocMDP") the presence of a document
timestamp and/or DSS information shall be ignored.
EXAMPLE           Document timestamp
1 0 obj
<<
/Type /Catalog /Pages 2 0 R
/AcroForm 5 0 R
>>
endobj
2 0 obj
<<
/Kids [3 0 R]
/Count 1
/Type /Pages
>>
endobj
3 0 obj
<<
/Type /Page
/Parent 2 0 R
/MediaBox [0 0 612 792]
/Annots 4 0 R
… other keys go here …
>>
endobj
4 0 obj
<<
/Type /Annot /Subtype /Widget
/Rect [0 0 0 0]
/F 4 /P 3 0 R
/FT /Sig /T (Sig)
/V 6 0 R
>>
endobj
5 0 obj
<<
/Fields [4 0 R]
/SigFlags 3
>>
endobj
6 0 obj
<<
/Type /DocTimeStamp
/Filter /Adobe.PPKLite
/SubFilter /ETSI.RFC3161
/Contents <00000>                                    %values go here inside of <>
/ByteRange [0 0 0 0]                                 %values go here inside of []
>>
endobj
12.8.6            Permissions
The Perms entry in the document catalog dictionary (see "Table 29 — Entries in the catalog
dictionary") shall specify a permissions dictionary (PDF 1.5). Each entry in this dictionary (see "Table
263 — Entries in a permissions dictionary" for the currently defined entries) shall specify the name of
a permission handler that controls access permissions for the document. These permissions are similar
to those defined by security handlers (see "Table 22 — Standard security handler user access
permissions") but do not require that the document be encrypted. For a permission to be actually
granted for a document, it shall be allowed by each permission handler that is present in the
permissions dictionary as well as by the security handler.
NOTE       An example of a permission is the ability to fill in a form field.
592                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 263 — Entries in a permissions dictionary
Key           Type          Value
DocMDP        dictionary    (Optional) An indirect reference to a signature dictionary (see "Table
255 — Entries in a signature dictionary"). This dictionary shall contain a
Reference entry that shall be a signature reference dictionary (see
"Table 255 — Entries in a signature dictionary") that has a DocMDP
transform method (see 12.8.2.2, "DocMDP") and corresponding
transform parameters.
If this entry is present, PDF processors shall enforce the permissions
specified by the P entry in the DocMDP transform parameters
dictionary and shall also validate the corresponding signature based on
whether any of these permissions have been violated.
UR3           dictionary    (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) A signature dictionary that may be
used to specify and validate additional capabilities (usage rights)
granted for this document; that is, the enabling of features of a PDF
processor that are not available by default.
The signature dictionary shall contain a Reference entry that shall be a
signature reference dictionary that has a UR transform method (see
12.8.2.3, "UR"). The transform parameter dictionary for this method
indicates which additional permissions shall be granted for the
document. If the signature is valid and recognized by the PDF processor,
then the PDF processor shall allow the specified permissions for the
document, in addition to the default permissions.
NOTE     For example, a PDF processor may not permit saving documents by
default. The signature can be used to validate that the additional
permissions placed within the PDF document have been granted by
the authority or agent that did the signing.
12.8.7            Legal content attestations
The PDF language provides a number of capabilities that can make the rendered appearance of a PDF
document vary. These capabilities could potentially be used to construct a document that misleads the
recipient of a document, intentionally or unintentionally. These situations are relevant when
considering the legal implications of a signed PDF document.
PDF provides a mechanism by which a document recipient can determine whether the document can
be trusted. The primary method is to accept only documents that contain certification signatures (one
that has a DocMDP signature that defines what shall be permitted to change in a document; see
12.8.2.2, "DocMDP").
When creating certification signatures, PDF writers should also create a legal attestation dictionary,
whose entries are shown in "Table 264 — Entries in a legal attestation dictionary". This dictionary
shall be the value of the Legal entry in the document catalog dictionary (see "Table 29 — Entries in the
catalog dictionary"). Its entries shall specify all content that may result in unexpected rendering of the
document contents. The author may provide further clarification of such content by means of the
Attestation entry. Reviewers should establish for themselves that they trust the author and contents
of the document. In the case of a legal challenge to the document, any questionable content can be
reviewed in the context of the information in this dictionary.
Table 264 — Entries in a legal attestation dictionary
Key                      Type       Value
JavaScriptActions        integer    (Optional) The number of ECMAScript actions found in the document
(see 12.6.4.17, "ECMAScript actions").
LaunchActions            integer    (Optional) The number of launch actions found in the document (see
12.6.4.6, "Launch actions").
URIActions               integer    (Optional) The number of URI actions found in the document (see
12.6.4.8, "URI actions").
MovieActions             integer    (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) The number of movie actions found
in the document (see 12.6.4.10, "Movie actions").
SoundActions             integer    (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) The number of sound actions found
in the document (see 12.6.4.9, "Sound actions").
HideAnnotationActions integer       (Optional) The number of hide actions found in the document (see
12.6.4.11, "Hide actions").
GoToRemoteActions        integer    (Optional) The number of remote go-to actions found in the document
(see 12.6.4.3, "Remote Go-To actions").
AlternateImages          integer    (Optional) The number of alternate images found in the document (see
8.9.5.4, "Alternate images")
ExternalStreams          integer    (Optional) The number of external streams found in the document.
TrueTypeFonts            integer    (Optional) The number of TrueType fonts found in the document (see
9.6.3, "TrueType fonts").
ExternalRefXobjects      integer    (Optional) The number of reference XObjects found in the document
(see 8.10.4, "Reference XObjects").
ExternalOPIdicts         integer    (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) The number of OPI dictionaries
found in the document (see 14.11.7, "Open prepress interface (OPI)").
NonEmbeddedFonts         integer    (Optional) The number of non-embedded fonts found in the document
(see 9.9, "Embedded font programs")
DevDepGS_OP              integer    (Optional) The number of references to the graphics state parameter
OP found in the document (see "Table 57 — Entries in a graphics state
parameter dictionary").
DevDepGS_HT              integer    (Optional) The number of references to the graphics state parameter
HT found in the document (see "Table 57 — Entries in a graphics state
parameter dictionary").
DevDepGS_TR              integer    (Optional) The number of references to the graphics state parameter
TR found in the document (see "Table 57 — Entries in a graphics state
parameter dictionary").
DevDepGS_UCR             integer    (Optional) The number of references to the graphics state parameter
UCR found in the document (see "Table 57 — Entries in a graphics
state parameter dictionary").
594                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                              Type       Value
DevDepGS_BG                      integer    (Optional) The number of references to the graphics state parameter
BG found in the document (see "Table 57 — Entries in a graphics state
parameter dictionary").
DevDepGS_FL                      integer    (Optional) The number of references to the graphics state parameter
FL found in the document (see "Table 57 — Entries in a graphics state
parameter dictionary").
Annotations                      integer    (Optional) The number of annotations found in the document (see
12.5, "Annotations").
OptionalContent                  boolean    (Optional) true if optional content is found in the document (see 8.11,
"Optional content").
Attestation                      text       (Optional) An attestation, created by the author of the document,
string     explaining the presence of any of the other entries in this dictionary or
the presence of any other content affecting the legal integrity of the
document.
12.9 Measurement properties
12.9.1            General
PDF documents, such as those created by CAD software, may contain graphics that are intended to
represent real-world objects. Users of such documents often require information about the scale and
units of measurement of the corresponding real-world objects and their relationship to units in PDF
user space.
This information enables users of interactive PDF processors to perform measurements that yield
results in the units intended by the creator of the document. A measurement in this context is the
result of a canonical function that takes as input a set pairs
{(𝑥0 , 𝑦0 ), … , (𝑥𝑛−1 , 𝑦𝑛−1 )}
and produces a single number as output depending on the type of measurement. For example, distance
measurement is equivalent to
𝑛−2
∑ √(𝑥i − 𝑥i+1 )2 + (𝑦i − 𝑦i+1 )2
i=0
Beginning with PDF 1.6, such information may be stored in a measure dictionary (see "Table 266 —
Entries in a measure dictionary"). Measure dictionaries provide information about measurement units
associated with a rectangular area of the document known as a viewport.
A viewport (PDF 1.6) is a rectangular region of a page. The optional VP entry in a page dictionary (see
"Table 31 — Entries in a page object") shall specify an array of viewport dictionaries, whose entries
shall be as shown in "Table 265 — Entries in a viewport dictionary". Viewports allow different
measurement scales (specified by the Measure entry) to be used in different areas of a page, if
necessary.
The dictionaries in the VP array shall be in drawing order. Since viewports might overlap, to determine
the viewport to use for any point on a page, the dictionaries in the array shall be examined, starting
with the last one and iterating in reverse, and the first one whose BBox entry contains the point shall
be chosen.
Any measurement that potentially involves multiple viewports, such as one specifying the distance
between two points, shall use the information specified in the viewport of the first point.
Table 265 — Entries in a viewport dictionary
Key        Type          Value
Type       name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be
Viewport for a viewport dictionary.
BBox       rectangle     (Required) A rectangle in default user space coordinates specifying the
location of the viewport on the page.
The two coordinate pairs of the rectangle shall be specified in
normalised form; that is, lower-left followed by upper-right, relative to
the measuring coordinate system. This ordering shall determine the
orientation of the measuring coordinate system (that is, the direction of
the positive x and y axes) in this viewport, which may have a different
rotation from the page.
The coordinates of this rectangle are independent of the origin of the
measuring coordinate system, specified in the O entry (see "Table 267
— Additional entries in a rectilinear measure dictionary") of the
measurement dictionary specified by Measure.
Name       text string   (Optional) A descriptive text string or title of the viewport, intended for
use in a user interface.
Measure    dictionary    (Optional) A measure dictionary (see "Table 266 — Entries in a measure
dictionary") that specifies the scale and units that shall apply to
measurements taken on the contents within the viewport.
PtData     dictionary    (Optional; PDF 2.0) A point data dictionary (see "Table 272 — Entries in
a point data dictionary") that shall specify the extended geospatial data
that applies to this viewport.
A measure dictionary shall specify an alternative coordinate system for a region of a page. Along with
the viewport dictionary, it shall provide the information needed to convert coordinates in the page’s
coordinate system to coordinates in the measuring coordinate system. The measure dictionary shall
provide information for formatting the resulting values into textual form for presentation in a
graphical user interface.
"Table 266 — Entries in a measure dictionary" shows the entries in a measure dictionary. PDF 1.6
defines only a single type of coordinate system, a rectilinear coordinate system, that shall be specified
by the value RL for the Subtype entry. RL is defined as one in which the x and y axes are perpendicular
and have units that increment linearly (to the right and up, respectively). PDF 2.0 defines a geospatial
596                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
coordinate system specified by the value GEO for the Subtype entry. Other subtypes may be used,
providing the flexibility to measure using other types of coordinate systems.
When the value of the Subtype entry is GEO, the dictionary shall define the relationship between
points or regions in the two dimensional PDF object space and points or regions with respect to an
underlying model of the earth (or, potentially, other ellipsoid objects).
Table 266 — Entries in a measure dictionary
Key           Type           Value
Type          name           (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be
Measure for a measure dictionary.
Subtype       name           (Optional) A name specifying the type of coordinate system to use for
measuring.
RL       for a rectilinear coordinate system
GEO      (PDF 2.0) for a geospatial coordinate system
Default value: RL
"Table 267 — Additional entries in a rectilinear measure dictionary" shows the additional entries in a
rectilinear measure dictionary. Many of the entries in this dictionary shall be number format arrays,
which are arrays of number format dictionaries (see "Table 268 — Entries in a number format
dictionary"). Each number format dictionary shall represent a specific unit of measurement (such as
miles or feet). It shall contain information about how each unit shall be expressed in text and factors
for calculating the number of units.
When the subtype of a measurement dictionary is GEO, additional entries are defined. "Table 269 —
Additional entries in a geospatial measure dictionary" lists and describes these additional entries in a
geospatial measure dictionary.
Number format arrays specify all the units that shall be used when expressing a specific measurement.
Each array shall contain one or more number format dictionaries, in descending order of granularity. If
one unit of measurement X is larger than one unit of measurement Y then X has a larger order of
granularity than Y. All the elements in the array shall contain text strings that, concatenated together,
specify how the units shall be displayed.
NOTE 2      For example, a measurement of 1.4505 miles can be expressed as "1.4505 mi", which would
require one number format dictionary for miles, or as "1 mi 2,378 ft 7 5/8 in", which would
require three dictionaries (for miles, feet, and inches).
NOTE 3      A number format dictionary specifying feet needs to precede one specifying inches.
Table 267 — Additional entries in a rectilinear measure dictionary
Key   Type          Value
R     text string   (Required) A text string expressing the scale ratio of the drawing in the region
corresponding to this dictionary. Universally recognised unit abbreviations
should be used, either matching those of the number format arrays in this
dictionary or those of commonly used scale ratios.
EXAMPLE 1         A common scale in architectural drawings is "1/4 in = 1 ft",
indicating that 1/4 inches in default user space is equivalent to 1
foot in real-world measurements.
If the scale ratio differs in the x and y directions, both scales should be
specified.
EXAMPLE 2         "in X 1 cm = 1 m, in Y 1 cm = 30 m".
X     array         (Required) A number format array for measurement of change along the x
axis and, if Y is not present, along the y axis as well. The first element in the
array shall contain the scale factor for converting from default user space
units to the largest units in the measuring coordinate system along that axis.
The directions of the x and y axes are in the measuring coordinate system and
are independent of the page rotation. These directions shall be determined by
the BBox entry of the containing viewport (see "Table 265 — Entries in a
viewport dictionary").
Y     array         (Required when the x and y scales have different units or conversion factors) A
number format array for measurement of change along the y axis. The first
element in the array shall contain the scale factor for converting from default
user space units to the largest units in the measuring coordinate system along
the y axis.
D     array         (Required) A number format array for measurement of distance in any
direction. The first element in the array shall specify the conversion to the
largest distance unit from units represented by the first element in X. The
scale factors from X, Y (if present) and CYX (if Y is present) shall be used to
convert from default user space to the appropriate units before applying the
distance function.
A     array         (Required) A number format array for measurement of area. The first element
in the array shall specify the conversion to the largest area unit from units
represented by the first element in X, squared. The scale factors from X, Y (if
present) and CYX (if Y is present) shall be used to convert from default user
space to the appropriate units before applying the area function.
T     array         (Optional) A number format array for measurement of angles. The first
element in the array shall specify the conversion to the largest angle unit
from degrees. The scale factor from CYX (if present) shall be used to convert
from default user space to the appropriate units before applying the angle
function.
S     array         (Optional) A number format array for measurement of the slope of a line. The
first element in the array shall specify the conversion to the largest slope unit
from units represented by the first element in Y divided by the first element
in X. The scale factors from X, Y (if present) and CYX (if Y is present) shall be
used to convert from default user space to the appropriate units before
applying the slope function.
598                                                                                   © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key            Type           Value
O              array          (Optional) An array of two numbers that shall specify the origin of the
measurement coordinate system in default user space coordinates. The
directions by which x and y increase in value from this origin shall be
determined by the viewport’s BBox entry (see "Table 265 — Entries in a
viewport dictionary").
Default value: the first coordinate pair (lower-left corner) of the rectangle
specified by the viewport’s BBox entry.
CYX            number         (Optional; meaningful only when Y is present) A factor that shall be used to
convert the largest units along the y axis to the largest units along the x axis. It
shall be used for calculations (distance, area, and angle) where the units are
be equivalent; if not specified, these calculations may not be performed
(which would be the case in situations such as x representing time and y
representing temperature). Other calculations (change in x, change in y, and
slope) shall not require this value.
The X and Y entries in a measure dictionary shall be number format arrays that shall specify the units
used for measurements in the x and y directions, respectively, and the ratio between user space units
and the specified units. Y is present only when the x and y measurements are in different units or have
different ratios; in this case, the CYX entry shall be used to convert y values to x values when
appropriate.
Table 268 — Entries in a number format dictionary
Key     Type           Value
Type name              (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be
NumberFormat for a number format dictionary.
U       text string    (Required) A text string specifying a label for displaying the units represented by
this dictionary in a user interface; the label should use a universally recognised
abbreviation.
C       number         (Required) The conversion factor used to multiply a value in partial units of the
previous number format array element to obtain a value in the units of this
dictionary. When this entry is in the first number format dictionary in the array, its
meaning (that is, what it shall be multiplied by) depends on which entry in the
rectilinear measure dictionary (see "Table 267 — Additional entries in a rectilinear
measure dictionary") references the number format array.
F       name           (Optional; meaningful only for the last dictionary in a number format array) A name
indicating whether and in what manner to display a fractional value from the result
of converting to the units of this dictionary by means of the C entry. Valid values
shall be:
D     Show as decimal to the precision specified by the D entry.
F     Show as a fraction with denominator specified by the D entry.
R     No fractional part; round to the nearest whole unit.
T     No fractional part; truncate to achieve whole units.
Default value: D.
Key   Type          Value
D     integer       (Optional; meaningful only for the last dictionary in a number format array) A
positive integer that shall specify the precision or denominator of a fractional
amount:
When the value of F is D, this entry shall be the precision of a decimal display; it
shall be a multiple of 10. Low-order zeros may be truncated unless FD is true.
Default value: 100 (hundredths, corresponding to two decimal digits).
When the value of F is F, this entry shall be the denominator of a fractional display.
The fraction may be reduced unless the value of FD is true.
Default value: 16.
FD    boolean       (Optional; meaningful only for the last dictionary in a number format array) If true, a
fractional value formatted according to the D entry may not have its denominator
reduced or low-order zeros truncated.
Default value: false.
RT    text string   (Optional) Text that shall be used between orders of thousands in display of
numerical values. An empty string indicates that no text shall be added.
Default value: COMMA (2Ch).
RD    text string   (Optional) Text that shall be used as the decimal position in displaying numerical
values. An empty string indicates that the default shall be used.
Default value: PERIOD (2Eh).
PS    text string   (Optional) Text that shall be concatenated to the left of the label specified by U. An
empty string indicates that no text shall be added.
Default value: A single ASCII SPACE character (20h).
SS    text string   (Optional) Text that shall be concatenated after the label specified by U. An empty
string indicates that no text shall be added.
Default value: A single ASCII SPACE character (20h).
O     name          (Optional) A name indicating the position of the label specified by U with respect to
the calculated unit value. Valid values shall be:
S    The label is a suffix to the value.
P    The label is a prefix to the value.
The characters specified by PS and SS shall be concatenated before considering this
entry.
Default value: S.
12.9.2           Algorithm: Use of a number format array to create a formatted text
string
To use a number format array to create a text string containing the appropriately formatted units for
display in a user interface, apply the following algorithm:
a) The entry in the rectilinear measure dictionary (see "Table 267 — Additional entries in a rectilinear
measure dictionary") that references the number format array determines the meaning of the initial
measurement value. For example, the X entry specifies user space units, and the T entry specifies
degrees.
600                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
b) Multiply the value specified previously by the C entry of the first number format dictionary in the array,
which converts the measurement to units of the largest granularity specified in the array. Apply the
value of RT as appropriate.
c) If the result contains no non-zero fractional portion, concatenate the label specified by the U entry in the
order specified by O, after adding spacing from PS and SS. The formatting is then complete.
d) If there is a non-zero fractional portion and no more elements in the array, format the fractional portion
as specified by the RD, F, D, and FD entries of the last dictionary. Concatenate the label specified by the U
entry in the order specified by O, after adding spacing from PS and SS. The formatting is then complete.
e) If there is a non-zero fractional portion and more elements in the array, proceed to the next number
format dictionary in the array. Multiply its C entry by the fractional result from the previous step. Apply
the value of RT as appropriate. Then proceed to step 3.
The concatenation of elements in this process assumes left-to-right order. Documents using right-to-
left languages may modify the process and the meaning of the entries as appropriate to produce the
correct results.
EXAMPLE           The following example shows a measure dictionary that specifies that changes in x or y are expressed in
miles; distances are expressed in miles, feet, and inches; and area is expressed in acres. Given a sample
distance in scaled units of 1.4505 miles, the formatted text produced by applying the number format array
would be "1 mi 2,378 ft 7 5/8 in".
<<
/Type /Measure
/Subtype /RL
/R (1in = 0.1 mi)
/X [<</U (mi)                            %x offset represented in miles
/C .00139                          %Conversion from user space units to miles
/D 100000
>>]
/D [<</U (mi) /C 1>>                     %Distance: initial unit is miles; no conversion needed
<</U (ft) /C 5280>>                  %Conversion from miles to feet
<</U (in) /C 12                      %Conversion from feet to inches
/F /F /D 8>>                       %Fractions of inches rounded to nearest 1/8
]
/A [<</U (acres)                         %Area: measured in acres
/C 640>>                           %Conversion from square miles to acres
]
>>
12.10             Geospatial features
12.10.1           General
PDF is a common delivery mechanism for map and satellite imagery data. In PDF 2.0, a geospatial
coordinate system is introduced ("Table 266 — Entries in a measure dictionary") along with a number
of PDF constructs, as explained in this clause, to support geospatially registered content.
12.10.2           Geospatial measure dictionary
When the subtype of a measurement dictionary ("Table 266 — Entries in a measure dictionary") is
GEO, additional entries are defined through a geospatial measure dictionary.
A geospatial measure dictionary, "Table 269 — Additional entries in a geospatial measure dictionary",
contains a description of the earth-based coordinate system associated with the PDF object, and
corresponding arrays of points in that coordinate system and the local object coordinate system. It may
contain a bounding polygon (the Bounds entry), which defines the region of the PDF object for which
the geographic associations are valid. It may also contain a choice of default units (the PDU entry) for
user displays of positions, distances and areas. An optional display coordinate system (the DCS entry)
allows a document to be authored to display values in a coordinate system other than that associated
with the source data. For example, a map may be created in a state planar coordinate system based on
a 1927 datum, but it is possible to display its latitude and longitude values in the WGS84 datum
corresponding to values reported by a GPS device.
The entries of a geospatial measure dictionary are shown in "Table 269 — Additional entries in a
geospatial measure dictionary".
Table 269 — Additional entries in a geospatial measure dictionary
Key       Type         Description
Bounds    array        (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of numbers that shall be taken pairwise to define a
series of points that describes the bounds of an area for which geospatial
transformations are valid.
For maps, this bounding polygon is known as a neatline. These numbers are
expressed relative to a unit square that describes the BBox associated with a
Viewport or form XObject, or the bounds of an image XObject. If not present, the
default values shall define a rectangle describing the full unit square, with values
of [0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.0].
NOTE 1 The polygon description need not be explicitly closed by repeating the first point
values as a final point.
GCS       dictionary   (Required; PDF 2.0) A geographic or projected coordinate system dictionary. See
"Table 270 — Entries in a geographic coordinate system dictionary" and "Table
271 — Entries in a projected coordinate system dictionary".
DCS       dictionary   (Optional; PDF 2.0) A projected or geographic coordinate system that shall be used
for the display of position values, such as latitude and longitude. See "Table 270 —
Entries in a geographic coordinate system dictionary" and "Table 271 — Entries
in a projected coordinate system dictionary". Formatting the displayed
representation of these values is controlled by the interactive PDF processor.
602                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type          Description
PDU        array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) Preferred Display Units. An array of three names that identify in
order a linear display unit, an area display unit, and an angular display unit.
The following are valid linear display units:
M        a metre
KM       a kilometre
FT       an international foot
USFT a U.S. Survey foot
MI       an international mile
NM       an international nautical mile
The following are valid area display units:
SQM      a square metre
HA       a hectare (10,000 square metres)
SQKM a square kilometre
SQFT a square foot (US Survey)
A        an acre
SQMI a square mile (international)
The following are valid angular display units:
DEG      a degree
GRD      a grad (1/400 of a circle, or 0.9 degrees)
GPTS       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) An array of numbers that shall be taken pairwise, defining
points in geographic space as degrees of latitude and longitude, respectively when
defining a geographic coordinate system. These values shall be based on the
geographic coordinate system described in the GCS dictionary. When defining a
projected coordinate system, this array contains values in a planar projected
coordinate space as eastings and northings. For Geospatial3D, when Geospatial
feature information is present (requirement type Geospatial3D) in a 3D
annotation, the GPTS array is required to hold 3D point coordinates as triples
rather than pairwise where the third value of each tripe is an elevation value.
NOTE 2 Any projected coordinate system includes an underlying geographic coordinate
system.
LPTS       array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of numbers that shall be taken pairwise to define
points in a 2D unit square. The unit square is mapped to the rectangular bounds of
the Viewport, image XObject, or forms XObject that contains the measure
dictionary. This array shall contain the same number of number pairs as the GPTS
array; each number pair is the unit square object position corresponding to the
geospatial position in the GPTS array. For Geospatial3D, when Geospatial feature
information is present in a 3D annotation (requirement type Geospatial3D), the
LPTS array is required to hold 3D point coordinates as triples corresponding to
the GPTS array in the 3D annotation view world coordinate space.
PCSM       array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) A 12-element transformation matrix of real numbers, defining
the transformation from XObject position coordinates to projected coordinate
system. If GCS is a geographic coordinate system dictionary then PCSM should be
ignored and GTPS used instead. If PCSM is present, it has priority over GPTS, and
GPTS values may be ignored. This priority provides backward compatibility.
NOTE 3 PCSM is an acronym for "Projected Coordinate System Matrix".
12.10.3        Geographic coordinate system dictionary
A geographic coordinate system (GEOGCS) specifies an ellipsoidal object in geographic coordinates:
angular units of latitude and longitude. The geographic coordinate system shall be described in either
or both of two well-established standards: as a numeric EPSG reference code, or as a Well Known Text
(WKT) string, which contains a description of algorithms and parameters needed for transformations.
"Table 270 — Entries in a geographic coordinate system dictionary" lists the entries in a geographic
coordinate system dictionary. A geographic coordinate system dictionary may be a value of the GCS or
the DCS entry of a geospatial measure dictionary. (See "Table 269 — Additional entries in a geospatial
measure dictionary".)
Table 270 — Entries in a geographic coordinate system dictionary
Key         Type           Description
Type        name           (Required; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes.
If present, shall be GEOGCS for a geographic coordinate system
dictionary.
EPSG        integer        (Optional; PDF 2.0) An EPSG reference code specifying the geographic
coordinate system. Shall not be present if WKT is present.
WKT         ASCII string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) A string of Well Known Text describing the
geographic coordinate system. Shall not be present if EPSG is present.
Either an EPSG code or a WKT string shall be present in a geographic coordinate system dictionary.
The EPSG reference codes are described in a database available through http://www.epsg.org as
administered by the International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (OGP). The WKT (Well Known
Text) format is specified in ISO 19162.
12.10.4        Projected coordinate system dictionary
A projected coordinate system (PROJCS), which includes an embedded GEOGCS, specifies the
algorithms and associated parameters used to transform points between geographic coordinates and a
two-dimensional (projected) coordinate system. Any transformation between a three-dimensional
curved geographic coordinate system and a two-dimensional coordinate system introduces distortions.
For small areas, this distortion may be small enough to allow direct mapping between geographic
coordinates and PDF object coordinates without requiring the use of a projected coordinate system.
The projected coordinate system shall be described in either or both of two well-established
standards: as a numeric EPSG reference code, or as a Well KnownText (WKT) string, which contains a
description of algorithms and parameters needed for transformations.
"Table 271 — Entries in a projected coordinate system dictionary" lists the entries in a projected
coordinate system dictionary. A projected coordinate system dictionary may be a value of the GCS or
the DCS entry of a geospatial measure dictionary, "Table 269 — Additional entries in a geospatial
measure dictionary".
604                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 271 — Entries in a projected coordinate system dictionary
Key              Type              Description
Type             name              (Required; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary
describes; shall be PROJCS for a projected coordinate system
dictionary.
EPSG             integer           (Optional; PDF 2.0) An EPSG reference code specifying the
projected coordinate system.
WKT              ASCII string      (Optional; PDF 2.0) A string of Well Known Text describing the
projected coordinate system.
Either an EPSG code or a WKT string shall be required in the projected coordinate system dictionary.
EXAMPLE 1         A WKT describing a geographic coordinate system
An example of WKT description of a geographic coordinate system, formatted for readability. The EPSG
code equivalent to the GCS_North_American_1983 geographic coordinate system is 4269.
GEOGCS["GCS_North_American_1983",
DATUM[
"D_North_American_1983",
SPHEROID["GRS_1980",6378137.0,298.257222101]
],
PRIMEM["Greenwich",0.0],
UNIT["Degree",0.0174532925199433]
]
EXAMPLE 2         A WKT describing a projected coordinate system
An example of WKT description of a projected coordinate system, formatted for readability. The EPSG code
equivalent to the North_American_Albers_Equal_Area_Conic projected coordinate system is 102008.
PROJCS["North_America_Albers_Equal_Area_Conic",
GEOGCS["GCS_North_American_1983",
DATUM["D_North_American_1983",
SPHEROID["GRS_1980",6378137.0, 298.257222101]
],
PRIMEM["Greenwich",0.0],
UNIT["Degree",0.0174532925199433]
],
PROJECTION["Albers"],
PARAMETER["False_Easting",0.0],
PARAMETER["False_Northing",0.0],
PARAMETER["Central_Meridian",-96.0],
PARAMETER["Standard_Parallel_1",20.0],
PARAMETER["Standard_Parallel_2",60.0]
PARAMETER["Latitude_Of_Origin",40.0],
UNIT["Meter",1.0]
]
12.10.5           Point data dictionary
Any 2D object (Viewport, image XObject, or form XObject) that contains a measure dictionary ("Table
266 — Entries in a measure dictionary") of subtype GEO can optionally include a PtData entry. The
value of a PtData entry is a point data dictionary or an array of point data dictionaries of extended data
associated with points in the 2D space. "Table 272 — Entries in a point data dictionary" lists the entries
of a point data dictionary.
Table 272 — Entries in a point data dictionary
Key          Type        Description
Type         name        (Required; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes;
shall be PtData for a point data dictionary.
Subtype      name        (Required; PDF 2.0) Shall be Cloud.
Names        array       (Required; PDF 2.0) An array of names that identify the internal data elements
of the individual point arrays in the XPTS array.
There are three predefined names:
LAT      latitude in degrees. The XPTS value is a number type.
LON      longitude in degrees. The XPTS value is a number type.
ALT      altitude in metres. The XPTS value is a number type.
NOTE     These names are, in effect, column headers for the array of XPTS values.
XPTS         array       (Required; PDF 2.0) An array of arrays of values. The number of members in
each interior array shall correspond to the size of the Names array; each
member in the interior arrays is of a type defined by the corresponding name
in the Names array.
The XPTS array is a collection of tuples without any guaranteed ordering or
relationship from point to point.
The names LAT, LON, and ALT are predefined, and shall be used to associate altitude information with
latitude and longitude positions.
12.11          Document requirements
12.11.1        General
A PDF processor that supports document requirements shall evaluate them before execution of any
ECMAScripts.
The Requirements entry in the document catalog (see 7.7.2, "Document catalog dictionary") shall be
an array of requirement dictionaries, whose entries are shown in "Table 273 — Entries common to all
requirement dictionaries".
Table 273 — Entries common to all requirement dictionaries
Key          Type        Description
Type         name        (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If present,
shall be Requirement for a requirement dictionary.
S            name        (Required) The type of requirement that this dictionary describes. See "Table
276 — Entries in a requirement handler dictionary" for valid values.
606                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key             Type           Description
V               name or        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The minimum version level of support needed to satisfy
dictionary     the requirement. See 12.11.4, "Requirement versions". If this entry is absent,
determining if the requirement is satisfied shall be done without regard to
version number.
Unless otherwise mentioned in the entries in "Table 276 — Entries in a
requirement handler dictionary", the value shall represent the PDF version.
RH              dictionary     (Optional) An alternative requirement handler dictionary or an array of such
or array       dictionaries. Each dictionary identifies a requirement handler that shall be
disabled (not invoked) if the interactive PDF processor can check the
requirement specified in the S entry (whether or not it can satisfy that
requirement). See 12.11.5, "Requirement handlers".
Default value: an empty array.
Penalty         integer        (Optional; PDF 2.0) An integer value that shall be between 0 and 100
(inclusive) that represents the penalty value to be applied when this
requirement cannot be met by a PDF processor.
Default value is 100.
There are two additional keys that may appear in a requirements dictionary that are specific to certain
types of requirements (i.e., value of the S key). These are described in "Table 274 — Entries for specific
types of requirements".
Table 274 — Entries for specific types of requirements
Key              Type             Description
Encrypt          dictionary       (Required, if the S key has the value Encryption: PDF 2.0) An encryption
dictionary ("Table 20 — Entries common to all encryption dictionaries")
that defines all of the relevant aspects of the encryption method needed to
process the document.
DigSig           dictionary       (Optional, but only used when the S key has the value of DigSig,
DigSigValidation or DigSigMDP; PDF 2.0) A signature dictionary ("Table 255
— Entries in a signature dictionary") that defines all of the relevant aspects
that are needed in order to process the digital signature requirements.
12.11.2           Requirement types
The S entry in a requirement dictionary identifies ("Table 273 — Entries common to all requirement
dictionaries") a feature of the PDF language or a capability that may be present in a PDF processor.
Such entries enable the document to identify feature(s) of PDF beyond those commonly expected, such
as 2D graphics rendering, and are required for correct handling in accordance with this document. In
addition, although not required for viewing, a document may also use requirement values that
stipulate required features of interactive PDF processors such as the ability to interact with or modify
the document.
"Table 275 — Requirement types" lists requirement types that have been defined through PDF 2.0.
Table 275 — Requirement types
Type               Description
OCInteract         Requires an interactive PDF processor to be able to display the list of optional
content groups (OCGs) in the Order array as described in "Table 99 — Entries in an
optional content configuration dictionary".
In addition, requires that an interactive PDF processor support the SetOCGState
action (see 12.6.4.13, "Set-OCG-state actions").
Additional information about OCGs can be found in 8.11.2, "Optional content groups"
and 8.11.4.4, "Usage and usage application dictionaries".
OCAutoStates       Requires an interactive PDF processor to implement the various Usage values that
can be present as the value of the AS key in an OCD as described in "Table 99 —
Entries in an optional content configuration dictionary" and 8.11.4.4, "Usage and
usage application dictionaries".
AcroFormInteract   Requires support for user interaction with forms (see 12.7, "Forms") defined as
interactive form dictionaries including updating field appearances when values
change. In addition, support for Trigger Actions (12.6.3, "Trigger events") is required.
NOTE 1 This requirement does not cover presentation of a form’s static appearance. That
presentation uses annotation appearances (12.5.5, "Appearance streams"), which all
PDF processors are assumed to support.
Navigation         Requires support for the presentation and handling of basic navigational elements
including link annotations (12.5.6.5, "Link annotations") and outlines (12.3.3,
"Document outline"). In addition, support shall be provided for GoTo, GoToR and
URI actions (12.6.4, "Action types") in any of these elements or as a document, page
or annotation trigger events (12.6.3, "Trigger events").
Markup             Requires support for the creation, modification and deletion of markup annotations
(12.5.6.2, "Markup annotations") including text annotations. In addition, any time the
visual appearance of the annotation changes, the appearance stream shall be
updated.
3DMarkup           Requires support for the creation, modification and deletion of text notes and
markup annotations on 3D objects (13.6.7.3.6, "3D comment note"). In addition, any
time where the visual appearance of the annotation changes, the appearance stream
shall be updated.
Multimedia         Requires support for multimedia (Screen) annotations (12.5.6.18, "Screen
annotations"). See also 13.2, "Multimedia". The support that is required is for the
general multimedia framework, not for an external player for any specific type of
multimedia content. Negotiation of the choice of an external player is handled by the
must honour (MH) and best efforts (BE) mechanism (13.2.2, "Viability") that is
defined as part of the multimedia framework (13.2, "Multimedia").
U3D                Requires support for 3D data streams conforming to the U3D specification. This shall
apply to the use of U3D in either 3D (13.6.3, "3D streams") or RichMedia annotations
(13.7.2.2, "RichMediaSettings dictionary"). This also includes support for associated
ECMAScripts.
If a V key is present in its Requirements dictionary, it shall represent the version of
U3D and not the PDF version.
608                                                                                  © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Type                        Description
PRC                         Requires support for 3D data streams conforming to the PRC specification. This shall
apply to the use of PRC in either 3D (13.6.3, "3D streams") or RichMedia annotations
(13.7.2.2, "RichMediaSettings dictionary"). This also includes support for associated
ECMAScripts.
If a V key is present in its Requirements dictionary, it shall represent the version of
PRC and not the PDF version.
Action                      Requires support for actions in general (12.6, "Actions"), other than GoTo and URI
actions (which are subsumed under the Navigation and Attachment requirements),
SetOCGState (subsumed under OCInteract) and ECMAScript actions (which are
separately declared with the EnableJavaScripts requirement).
EnableJavaScripts           Requires support for execution of ECMAScripts appearing in ECMAScript actions and
in the ECMAScript name tree for document-level ECMAScripts.
NOTE 2 ECMAScripts contained in 3D & RichMedia annotations are handled by their
respective requirements.
Attachment                  Requires support for displaying (to the user) the list of file attachments (see 7.11.4,
"Embedded file streams") and enabling users to extract any existing attachments. In
addition, support is provided for GoToE actions (12.6.4, "Action types") when located
in any navigational element or trigger event.
NOTE 3 The list of file attachments is taken from the EmbeddedFiles names tree (see 7.7.4,
"Name dictionary") and any FileAttachment annotation (see 12.5.6.15, "File
attachment annotations").
AttachmentEditing           In addition to the requirements of the Attachment value, support for adding new
attachments into the EmbeddedFiles names tree (see 7.7.4, "Name dictionary"),
deleting existing ones as well as modification of attachment attributes (e.g., name &
description) are also required.
Collection                  Requires support for displaying the embedded files referenced from the document’s
collection dictionary (12.3.5, "Collections") along with any associated metadata. Also
requires that the user can extract or otherwise view the contents of each item in the
collection.
(PDF 2.0) For unencrypted wrapper documents for an encrypted payload document
(see 7.6.7, "Unencrypted wrapper document") the Collection requirement should not
be specified for the unencrypted wrapper document.
NOTE 4 Although the unencrypted wrapper document is a collection, the intent of the
wrapper is to enable PDF processors that are unable to decrypt the embedded
encrypted payload document to present the content of the unencrypted wrapper
document to assist users in understanding the cryptographic requirements of the
encrypted payload document. Specifying the Collection requirement on the wrapper
could discourage PDF processors incapable of displaying collections from presenting
the unencrypted wrapper content.
CollectionEditing           In addition to the requirements of the Collection value, support for adding to the
collection (12.3.5, "Collections"), deleting existing items as well as modification of
collection item attributes and metadata, are also required.
Type                   Description
DigSigValidation       Requires support for the validation of digital signatures (both document and
certifying) that have been applied to the PDF including the handling of supplied
revocation information. See 12.8, "Digital signatures", and 12.8.3.4.5, "Requirements
for validation of PAdES signatures".
This does not require the support for 12.8.2.2.2, "Validating signatures that use the
DocMDP transform method" which is a separate requirement: DigSigMDP.
DigSig                 In addition to the validation requirements of DigSigValidation, this specifies the
requirements to support the application of a digital signature to a document (also
known as signing). See 12.8, "Digital signatures".
DigSigMDP              In addition to the requirements of DigSig and DigSigValidation, this also requires
support for modification detection analysis to determine if only allowable
modifications have been made. See 12.8.2.2.2, "Validating signatures that use the
DocMDP transform method".
RichMedia              Requires support for playing rich media annotations as specified in 13.7.2,
"RichMedia annotations".
Geospatial2D           Requires support for processing provided geospatial information in the page content
and associated resources. See 12.10, "Geospatial features".
Geospatial3D           Requires support for processing provided geospatial information in any 3D
annotations. See 12.10, "Geospatial features". This type requires provision within the
3D Annotation, and also applies 3D requirements to Geospatial information.
DPartInteract          Requires support for the display of the DParts hierarchy and its use for navigation of
the document parts. See 14.12, "Document parts".
SeparationSimulation Requires support for simulation separations as described in 10.8, "Rendering for
separations" and 10.8.3, "Separation simulation".
NOTE 5 This is sometimes referred to as "Overprint Preview".
Transitions            Requires support for transitions/presentations (12.4.4, "Presentations") as well as
transition actions (12.6.4.14, "Rendition actions")
Encryption             Requires support for the specific set of encryption parameters that are specified by
the encryption dictionary provided as the value of the Encrypt key in the
requirement dictionary (see "Table 273 — Entries common to all requirement
dictionaries" and "Table 274 — Entries for specific types of requirements").
(PDF 2.0) For unencrypted wrapper documents for an encrypted payload document
(see 7.6.7, "Unencrypted wrapper document") the Encryption requirement should
not be specified for the unencrypted wrapper document.
NOTE 6 The intent of the wrapper is to enable PDF processors that are unable to decrypt the
embedded encrypted payload document to present the content of the unencrypted
wrapper document to assist users in understanding the cryptographic requirements
of the encrypted payload document. Specifying the Encryption requirement on the
wrapper could discourage PDF processors incapable of decrypting the embedded
encrypted payload from presenting the unencrypted wrapper content.
Additional requirement types, including ones identifying vendor-specific features, may be registered
according to the rules described in Annex E, "Extending PDF".
610                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
12.11.3           Requirement penalty values
Each Requirements dictionary shall contain an S key whose value should be chosen from a list of
those defined in "Table 275 — Requirement types" but only for those features that are deemed critical
for the successful rendering of the document. The values of the Penalty key is the penalty number
expressed as an integer in the range [0, 100]. The presence of this requirements dictionary indicates
that the associated feature is used or needed by the document.
A value of zero for the Penalty key would indicate that although the document uses this feature the
need is optional. A value of 100 indicates that this document will not produce the author’s intent unless
the PDF processor can fully support this feature. Values between 0 and 100 are available to weight the
value of this feature among other features in the same document requirements array as well as when
contributing to the total penalty points to weigh against other documents in the choosing process if
alternatives are available.
In the situation where the penalty values are being used to evaluate the presentation of the base PDF
document, and there exist no other alternates, if the penalty value exceeds 100 then the PDF processor
should not attempt to display or process the document.
12.11.4           Requirement versions
A requirement dictionary may include a V entry (PDF 2.0) that specifies a version number for a specific
technology related to the requirement in question. It might be a PDF version number, an XFA version
number (for those requirement related to XFA), a version of U3D or PRC, or a vendor-specific extension
level.
Some PDF and XFA features have evolved over successive PDF versions. A PDF file may contain uses of
a feature or an embedded data stream that can only be successfully interpreted by a PDF processor
supporting a specific version of PDF or higher. This constraint may be indicated by including a V entry
in the requirement dictionary identifying the PDF version.
The value of V shall be one of the following:
•    A name that specifies a version number, represented as two or more decimal integers separated
by a period. The number of decimals places is determined by the technology in question for which
the version applies. For example, PDF and XFA versions are always two digits; others are always
three.
NOTE        This is specified as a name, not as a number, in order to avoid any ambiguities caused by inexact
internal representation of decimal fractions. No non-numerals, except for the decimal point, can
be present.
•    An extensions dictionary that specifies a vendor-specific extension to a PDF version (see 7.12,
"Extensions dictionary"). It shall only be used when describing a version of PDF for which a
simple version (e.g., 1.7) is not sufficient and has no meaning for any other requirement. The
extensions dictionary shall contain exactly one entry, whose key shall correspond to the
registered prefix for the vendor that has defined this requirement type.
If the V entry is not present, determining if the requirement is satisfied shall be done without regard to
version number.
12.11.5         Requirement handlers
An alternative requirement handler is an alternative means for determining if the requirements
associated with a document’s features are satisfied. Traditionally, requirements handling has been
accomplished with an ECMAScript segment in the document-level ECMAScripts stored in the
document’s name dictionary.
To create PDF documents that are compatible with processors that support PDF 1.7 and PDF 2.0, both
the document requirements feature and the ECMAScript alternative requirements handler should be
present in the document.
A document using the document requirements feature can specify that an ECMAScript function is to be
disabled by including an RH entry whose value is an alternative requirement handler dictionary (or an
array of such dictionaries), each of which identifies a handler that shall be disabled. "Table 276 —
Entries in a requirement handler dictionary" describes the entries in an alternative requirement
handler dictionary.
A requirement handler is a program that verifies certain requirements are satisfied. "Table 276 —
Entries in a requirement handler dictionary" describes the entries in a requirement handler dictionary.
Table 276 — Entries in a requirement handler dictionary
Key       Type        Description
Type      name        (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If present,
shall be ReqHandler for a requirement handler dictionary.
S         name        (Required) The type of requirement handler that this dictionary describes.
Valid requirement handler types shall be JS (for ECMAScript requirement
handlers) and NoOp.
A value of NoOp allows older PDF processors to ignore unrecognised
requirements. This value does not add any specific entry to the
requirement handler dictionary.
Script    text string (Optional; valid only if the S entry has a value of JS) The name of a
document-level ECMAScript action stored in the document name
dictionary (see 7.7.4, "Name dictionary"). If the PDF processor
understands the parent document requirements dictionary and can verify
the requirement specified in that dictionary, it shall disable execution of
the requirement handler identified in this dictionary.
If an alternative requirement handler dictionary has an S entry with an unrecognised type, it shall be
ignored.
12.11.6         Requirements processing
Document requirements can be presented for an individual document as the value of the
Requirements key in that document's catalog. Document requirements shall be evaluated before
execution of any document ECMAScripts. If requirements cannot be met, as determined by the
computation of the penalty value as described in 12.11.3, "Requirement penalty values", then the
processing of the document shall not continue.
612                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
