13        Multimedia features
13.1 General
This clause describes those features of PDF that support embedding and playing multimedia content. It
contains the following subclauses:
•    13.2, "Multimedia" describes the comprehensive set of multimedia capabilities that were
introduced in PDF 1.5.
13.3, "Sounds" and 13.4, "Movies" describe deprecated features superseded by 13.7, "
•    Rich media".
•    13.6, "3D Artwork" describes the capability of embedding three-dimensional graphics in a
document, introduced in PDF 1.6.
13.7, "
•    Rich media" describes rich media annotations providing a common framework for video, audio,
animations and other multimedia presentations.
13.2 Multimedia
13.2.1          General
PDF 1.5 introduces a comprehensive set of language constructs to enable the following capabilities:
•    Arbitrary media types may be embedded in PDF files.
•    Embedded media, as well as referenced media outside a PDF file, may be played with a variety of
player software. (In some situations, the player software may be the interactive PDF processor
itself.)
NOTE 1     The term playing is used with a wide variety of media, and is not restricted to audio or video. For
example, it can be applied to static images such as JPEGs.
•    Media objects may have multiple renditions, which may be chosen at play-time based on
considerations such as available bandwidth.
•    Document authors may control play-time requirements, such as which player software should be
used to play a given media object.
•    Media objects may be played in various ways; for example, in a floating window as well as in a
region on a page.
•    Future extensions to the media constructs may be handled in an appropriate manner by current
interactive PDF processors. Authors may control how old interactive PDF processors treat future
extensions.
•    Document authors may adapt the use of multimedia to accessibility requirements.
•    On-line media objects may be played efficiently, even when very large.
The following list summarises the multimedia features and indicates where each feature is discussed:
•    13.2.2, "Viability" describes the rules for determining when media objects are suitable for playing
on a particular system.
•    Rendition actions (see 12.6.4.14, "Rendition actions") shall be used to begin the playing of
614                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
multimedia content.
•    A rendition action associates a screen annotation (see 12.5.6.18, "Screen annotations") with a
rendition (see 13.2.3, "Renditions").
•    Renditions are of two varieties: media renditions (see 13.2.3.2, "Media renditions") that define the
characteristics of the media to be played, and selector renditions (see 13.2.3.3, "Selector
renditions") that enables choosing which of a set of media renditions should be played.
•    Media renditions contain entries that specify what should be played (see 13.2.4, "Media clip
objects"), how it should be played (see 13.2.5, "Media play parameters"), and where it should be
played (see 13.2.6, "Media screen parameters").
•    13.2.7, "Other multimedia objects" describes several PDF objects that are referenced by the
preceding major objects.
NOTE 2      Some of the features described in the following subclauses have references to corresponding
elements in the Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL 3.0) standard.
13.2.2            Viability
When playing multimedia content, the interactive PDF processor shall often make decisions such as
which player software and which options, such as volume and duration, to use.
In making these decisions, the viewer shall determine the viability of the objects used. If an object is
considered non-viable, the media should not be played. If the object is viable, the media should be
played, though possibly under less than optimum conditions.
There are several entries in the multimedia object dictionaries whose values shall have an effect on
viability. In particular, some of the object dictionaries define two entries that divide options into one of
two categories:
•    MH ("must honour"): The options specified by this entry shall be honoured; otherwise, the
containing object shall be considered non-viable.
•    BE ("best effort"): An attempt should be made to honour the options; however, if they cannot be
honoured, the containing object is still considered viable.
MH and BE are both dictionaries, and the same entries shall be defined for both of them. In any
dictionary where these entries are allowed, both entries may be present, or only one, or neither.
EXAMPLE           The media play parameters dictionary (see "Table 293 — Entries in a media screen parameters dictionary")
allows the playback volume to be set by means of the V entry in its MH and BE dictionaries (see "Table 294
— Entries in a media screen parameters MH/BE dictionary").
If the specified volume cannot be honoured, the object shall be considered non-viable if V is in the MH
dictionary, and playback shall not occur. If V is in the BE dictionary (and not also in the MH dictionary),
playback should still occur: the playing software attempts to honour the specified option as best it can.
Using this mechanism, authors may specify minimum requirements (MH) and preferred options (BE).
They may also specify how entries that are added in the future to the multimedia dictionaries shall be
interpreted by old interactive PDF processors. If an entry that is unrecognised by the viewer is in the
MH dictionary, the object shall be considered non-viable. If an unrecognised entry is in a BE dictionary,
the entry shall be ignored and viability shall be unaffected. Unless otherwise stated, an object shall be
considered non-viable if its MH dictionary contains an unrecognised key or an unrecognised value for a
recognised key.
The following rules apply to the entries in MH and BE dictionaries, which behave somewhat differently
from other PDF dictionaries:
•    If an entry is required, the requirement is met if the entry is present in either the MH dictionary
or the BE dictionary.
•    If an optional entry is not present in either dictionary, it shall be considered to be present with its
default value (if one is defined) in the BE dictionary.
•    If an instance of the same entry is present in both MH and BE, the instance in the BE dictionary
shall be ignored unless otherwise specified.
•    If the value of an entry in an MH or a BE dictionary is a dictionary or array, it shall be treated as
an atomic unit when determining viability. That is, all entries within the dictionary or array shall
be honoured for the containing object to be viable.
NOTE       When determining whether entries can be honoured, it is not required that each one be
evaluated independently, since they can be dependent on one another. That is, an interactive
PDF processor or player can examine multiple entries at once (even within different
dictionaries) to determine whether their values can be honoured.
The following media objects may have MH and BE dictionaries. They function as described previously,
except where noted in the individual subclauses:
•    Rendition ("Table 278 — Entries in a rendition MH/BE dictionary")
•    Media clip data ("Table 287 — Entries in a media clip data MH/BE dictionary")
•    Media clip section ("Table 289 — Entries in a media clip section MH/BE dictionary")
•    Media play parameters ("Table 291 — Entries in a media play parameters MH/BE dictionary")
•    Media screen parameters ("Table 294 — Entries in a media screen parameters MH/BE
dictionary")
13.2.3          Renditions
13.2.3.1        General
There are two types of rendition objects:
•    A media rendition (see 13.2.3.2, "Media renditions") is a basic media object that specifies what to
play, how to play it, and where to play it.
•    A selector rendition (see 13.2.3.3, "Selector renditions") contains an ordered list of renditions. This
list may include other selector renditions, resulting in a tree whose leaves are media renditions.
The interactive PDF processor should play the first viable media rendition it encounters in the
tree (see 13.2.2, "Viability").
NOTE 1     "Table 277 — Entries common to all rendition dictionaries" shows the entries common to all
rendition dictionaries. The N entry in a rendition dictionary specifies a name that can be used to
access the rendition object by means of name tree lookup (see "Table 32 — Entries in the name
dictionary"). ECMAScript actions (see 12.6.4.17, "ECMAScript actions"), for example, use this
mechanism.
Since the values referenced by name trees shall be indirect objects, all rendition objects should be
indirect objects.
NOTE 2     A rendition dictionary is not required to have a name tree entry. When it does, the interactive
PDF processor needs to ensure that the name specified in the tree is kept the same as the value
of the N entry (for example, if the user interface allows the name to be changed). As a
616                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
consequence it is recommended that a document not contain multiple renditions with the same
name.
The MH and BE entries are dictionaries whose entries may be present in one or the other of them, as
described in 13.2.2, "Viability". For renditions, these dictionaries shall have a single entry C (see "Table
278 — Entries in a rendition MH/BE dictionary"), whose value shall have a media criteria dictionary
specifying a set of criteria that shall be met for the rendition to be considered viable (see "Table 279 —
Entries in a media criteria dictionary").
The media criteria dictionary behaves somewhat differently than other MH/BE entries, as they are
described in 13.2.2, "Viability". The criteria specified by all of its entries shall be met regardless of
whether they are in an MH or a BE dictionary. The only exception is that if an entry in a BE dictionary
is unrecognised by the interactive PDF processor, it shall not affect the viability of the object. If a media
criteria dictionary is present in both MH and BE, the entries in both dictionaries shall be individually
evaluated, with MH taking precedence (corresponding BE entries shall be ignored).
Table 277 — Entries common to all rendition dictionaries
Key         Type            Value
Type        name            (Optional) The type of PDF object that dictionary describes; if present, shall be
Rendition for a rendition object.
S           name            (Required) The type of rendition that this dictionary describes. May be MR for
media rendition or SR for selector rendition. The rendition is non-viable if the
interactive PDF processor does not recognise the value of this entry.
N           text string     (Optional) A Unicode-encoded text string specifying the name of the rendition for
use in a user interface and for name tree lookup by ECMAScript actions.
MH          dictionary      (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 278 — Entries in a rendition
MH/BE dictionary") shall be honoured for the rendition to be considered viable.
BE          dictionary      (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 278 — Entries in a rendition
MH/BE dictionary") shall only be honoured in a "best effort" sense.
Table 278 — Entries in a rendition MH/BE dictionary
Key     Type            Value
C       dictionary      (Optional) A media criteria dictionary (see "Table 279 — Entries in a media
criteria dictionary").
The media criteria dictionary behaves somewhat differently than other MH/
BE entries described in 13.2.2, "Viability". The criteria specified by all of its
entries shall be met regardless of whether it is in a MH or a BE dictionary. The
only exception is that if an entry in a BE dictionary is unrecognised by the
interactive PDF processor, it shall not affect the viability of the object.
Table 279 — Entries in a media criteria dictionary
Key     Type         Value
Type    name         (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MediaCriteria for a media criteria dictionary.
A       boolean      (Optional) If specified, the value of this entry shall match the user’s
preference for whether to hear audio descriptions in order for this
object to be viable.
NOTE 1 Equivalent to SMIL’s systemAudioDesc attribute.
C       boolean      (Optional) If specified, the value of this entry shall match the user’s
preference for whether to see text captions in order for this object to be
viable.
NOTE 2 Equivalent to SMIL’s systemCaptions attribute.
O       boolean      (Optional) If specified, the value of this entry shall match the user’s
preference for whether to hear audio overdubs in order for this object
to be viable.
S       boolean      (Optional) If specified, the value of this entry shall match the user’s
preference for whether to see subtitles in order for this object to be
viable.
R       integer      (Optional) If specified, the system’s bandwidth (in bits per second) shall
be greater than or equal to the value of this entry in order for this object
to be viable.
NOTE 3 Equivalent to SMIL’s systemBitrate attribute.
D       dictionary   (Optional) A dictionary (see "Table 280 — Entries in a minimum bit
depth dictionary") specifying the minimum bit depth required in order
for this object to be viable.
NOTE 4 Equivalent to SMIL’s systemScreenDepth attribute.
Z       dictionary   (Optional) A dictionary (see "Table 281 — Entries in a minimum screen
size dictionary") specifying the minimum screen size required in order
for this object to be viable.
NOTE 5 Equivalent to SMIL’s systemScreenSize attribute.
V       array        (Optional) An array of software identifier objects (see 13.2.7.4,
"Software identifier dictionary"). If this entry is present and non-empty,
the interactive PDF processor shall be identified by one or more of the
objects in the array in order for this object to be viable.
P       array        (Optional) An array containing one or two name objects specifying a
minimum and optionally a maximum PDF language version, in the same
format as the Version entry in the document catalog dictionary (see
"Table 29 — Entries in the catalog dictionary"). If this entry is present
and non-empty, the version of multimedia constructs fully supported by
the interactive PDF processor shall be within the specified range in
order for this object to be viable.
618                                                                                 © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key           Type          Value
L             array         (Optional) An array of language identifiers (see 14.9.2.2, "Language
identifiers"). If this entry is present and non-empty, the language in
which the interactive PDF processor is running shall exactly match a
language identifier, or consist only of a primary code that matches the
primary code of an identifier, in order for this object to be viable.
NOTE 6 Equivalent to SMIL’s systemLanguage attribute.
Table 280 — Entries in a minimum bit depth dictionary
Key           Type          Value
Type          name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MinBitDepth for a minimum bit depth dictionary.
V             integer       (Required) A positive integer specifying the minimum screen depth (in
bits) of the monitor for the rendition to be viable.
M             integer       (Optional) A monitor specifier (see "Table 304 — Monitor specifier
values") that specifies which monitor the value of V should be tested
against. If the value is unrecognised, the object shall not be viable.
Default value: 0.
Table 281 — Entries in a minimum screen size dictionary
Key           Type          Value
Type          name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MinScreenSize for a rendition object.
V             array         (Required) An array containing two non-negative integers. The width
and height (in pixels) of the monitor specified by M shall be greater than
or equal to the values of the first and second integers in the array,
respectively, in order for this object to be viable.
M             integer       (Optional) A monitor specifier (see "Table 304 — Monitor specifier
values") that specifies which monitor the value of V should be tested
against. If the value is unrecognised, the object shall be not viable.
Default value: 0.
13.2.3.2          Media renditions
"Table 282 — Additional entries in a media rendition dictionary" lists the entries in a media rendition
dictionary. Its entries specify what media should be played (C), how (P), and where (SP) it should be
played. A media rendition object shall be viable if and only if the objects referenced by its C, P, and SP
entries are viable.
C may be omitted only in cases where a referenced player takes no meaningful input. This requires that
P shall be present and that its referenced media play parameters dictionary (see "Table 290 — Entries
in a media play parameters dictionary") shall contain a PL entry, whose referenced media players
dictionary (see 13.2.7.2, "Media players dictionary") has a non-empty MU array or a non-empty A
array.
Table 282 — Additional entries in a media rendition dictionary
Key          Type         Value
C            dictionary   (Optional) A media clip dictionary (see 13.2.4, "Media clip objects") that
specifies what should be played when the media rendition object is
played.
P            dictionary   (Required if C is not present, otherwise optional) A media play
parameters dictionary (see 13.2.5, "Media play parameters") that
specifies how the media rendition object should be played.
Default value: a media play parameters dictionary whose entries (see
"Table 290 — Entries in a media play parameters dictionary") all
contain their default values.
SP           dictionary   (Optional) A media screen parameters dictionary (see 13.2.6, "Media
screen parameters") that specifies where the media rendition object
should be played.
Default value: a media screen parameters dictionary whose entries (see
"Table 293 — Entries in a media screen parameters dictionary") all
contain their default values.
13.2.3.3         Selector renditions
A selector rendition dictionary shall specify an array of rendition objects in its R entry (see "Table 283
— Additional entries specific to a selector rendition dictionary"). The renditions in this array should be
ordered by preference, with the most preferred rendition first. At play-time, the renditions in the array
shall be evaluated and the first viable media rendition, if any, shall be played. If one of the renditions is
itself a selector, that selector shall be evaluated in turn, yielding the equivalent of a depth-first tree
search. A selector rendition itself may be non-viable; in this case, none of its associated media
renditions shall be evaluated (in effect, this branch of the tree is skipped).
NOTE        This mechanism can be used, for example, to specify that a large video clip need be used on high-
bandwidth machines and a smaller clip need be used on low-bandwidth machines.
Table 283 — Additional entries specific to a selector rendition dictionary
Key          Type         Value
R            array        (Required) An array of rendition objects. The first viable media rendition
object found in the array, or nested within a selector rendition in the
array, should be used. An empty array is valid.
13.2.4           Media clip objects
13.2.4.1         General
There are two types of media clip objects, determined by the subtype S, which can be either MCD for
620                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
media clip data (see 13.2.4.2, "Media clip data") or MCS for media clip section (see 13.2.4.3, "Media clip
section"). The entries for media clip dictionaries are listed in "Table 284 — Entries common to all
media clip dictionaries".
Table 284 — Entries common to all media clip dictionaries
Key      Type           Value
Type     name           (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present, shall
be MediaClip for a media clip dictionary.
S        name           (Required) The subtype of media clip that this dictionary describes. May be MCD
for media clip data (see 13.2.4.2, "Media clip data") or MCS for a media clip section
(see 13.2.4.3, "Media clip section"). The media clip is non-viable if the interactive
PDF processor does not recognise the value of this entry.
N        text string    (Optional) The name of the media clip, for use in the user interface.
13.2.4.2          Media clip data
A media clip data dictionary defines the data for a media object that can be played. Its entries are listed
in "Table 285 — Additional entries in a media clip data dictionary".
NOTE 1      Media clip data dictionaries can reference a URL to a streaming video presentation or a movie
embedded in the PDF file.
Table 285 — Additional entries in a media clip data dictionary
Key      Type              Value
D        file              (Required) A full file specification or form XObject that specifies the actual media
specification     data.
or stream
CT       ASCII string      (Optional; shall not be present for form XObjects) An ASCII string identifying the
type of data in D. The string should conform to the content type specification
described in Internet RFC 2045.
P        dictionary        (Optional) A media permissions dictionary (see "Table 286 — Entries in a media
permissions dictionary") containing permissions that control the use of the
media data. Default value: a media permissions dictionary containing default
values.
Alt      array             (Optional) An array that provides alternative text descriptions for the media clip
data in case it cannot be played; see 14.9.2.4, "Multi-language text arrays"
PL       dictionary        (Optional) A media players dictionary (see 13.2.7.2, "Media players dictionary")
that identifies, among other things, players that are valid and not valid for
playing the media.
If the media players dictionary is non-viable, the media clip data shall be non-
viable.
Key        Type            Value
MH         dictionary      (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 287 — Entries in a media clip
data MH/BE dictionary") shall be honoured for the media clip data to be
considered viable.
BE         dictionary      (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 289 — Entries in a media clip
section MH/BE dictionary") should only be honoured in a "best effort" sense.
The media clip data object is non-viable if the object referenced by the D entry does not contain a Type
entry, the Type entry is unrecognised, or the referenced object is not a dictionary or stream.
This shall effectively exclude the use of simple file specifications (see 7.11, "File specifications").
If D references a file specification that has an embedded file stream (see 7.11.4, "Embedded file
streams"), the embedded file stream’s Subtype entry shall be ignored if present, and the media clip
data dictionary’s CT entry shall identify the type of data.
If D references a form XObject, the associated player is implicitly the interactive PDF processor, and the
form XObject shall be rendered as if it were any other data type.
The F and D entries in the media play parameters dictionary (see "Table 290 — Entries in a media play
parameters dictionary") apply to a form XObject just as they do to a QuickTime movie.
For media other than form XObjects, the media clip object shall provide enough information to allow an
interactive PDF processor to locate an appropriate player. This may be done by providing one or both
of the following entries, the first being the preferred method:
•    A CT entry that specifies the content type of the media. If this entry is present, any player that is
selected shall support this content type.
•    A PL entry that specifies one or more players that may be used to play the referenced media. if CT
is present, there should also be a PL present.
The P entry specifies a media permissions dictionary (see "Table 286 — Entries in a media
permissions dictionary") specifying the manner in which the data referenced by the media may be
used by an interactive PDF processor. These permissions allow authors control over how their data are
exposed to operations that could allow it to be copied. If the dictionary contains unrecognised entries
or entries with unrecognised values, it is considered non-viable, and the interactive PDF processor
shall not play the media.
Table 286 — Entries in a media permissions dictionary
Key           Type        Value
Type          name        (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MediaPermissions for a media permissions dictionary.
622                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key           Type          Value
TF            ASCII         (Optional) An ASCII string indicating the circumstances under which it is
string        acceptable to write a temporary file in order to play a media clip. Valid
values are:
(TEMPNEVER)          Never allowed.
(TEMPEXTRACT) Allowed only if the document permissions allow
content extraction; when bit 5 of the user access
permissions (see "Table 22 — Standard security
handler user access permissions") is set.
(TEMPACCESS)         Allowed only if the document permissions allow
content extraction, including for accessibility
purposes; when bits 5 or 10 of the user access
permissions (see "Table 22 — Standard security
handler user access permissions") are set, or both.
(TEMPALWAYS)         Always allowed.
Default value: (TEMPNEVER).
An unrecognised value shall be treated as (TEMPNEVER).
An unrecognised value shall be treated as (TEMPNEVER).
The BU entry in the media clip data MH and BE dictionaries (see "Table 287 — Entries in a media clip
data MH/BE dictionary") specifies a base URL for the media data. Relative URLs in the media (which
point to auxiliary files or are used for hyperlinking) should be resolved with respect to the value of BU.
The following are additional requirements concerning the BU entry:
•    If BU is in the MH dictionary and the base URL is not honoured the media clip data shall be non-
viable.
NOTE 2       An example of this is that the player does not accept base URLs.
•    Determining the viability of the object shall not require checking whether the base URL is valid
(i.e., the target host exists).
•    Absolute URls within the media shall not be affected.
•    If the media itself contains a base URL, that value shall be used in preference to BU.
NOTE 3       An example of this is that the <BASE> element is defined in HTML.
•    BU is completely independent of and unrelated to the value of the URI entry in the document
catalog dictionary (see 7.7.2, "Document catalog dictionary").
•    If BU is not present and the media is embedded within the document, the URL to the PDF file itself
shall be used as if it were the value of a BU entry in the BE dictionary; that is, as an implicit best-
effort base URL.
Table 287 — Entries in a media clip data MH/BE dictionary
Key           Type          Value
BU            ASCII         (Optional) An absolute URL that shall be used as the base URL in
string        resolving any relative URLs found within the media data.
13.2.4.3          Media clip section
A media clip section dictionary (see "Table 288 — Additional entries in a media clip section dictionary")
defines a continuous section of another media clip object (known as the next-level media clip object).
The next-level media clip object, specified by the D entry, may be either a media clip data object or
another media clip section object. However, the linked list formed by the D entries of media clip
sections shall terminate in a media clip data object. If the next-level media object is non-viable, the
media clip section shall be also non-viable.
NOTE 1        A media clip section could define a 15-minute segment of a media clip data object representing a
two-hour movie.
Table 288 — Additional entries in a media clip section dictionary
Key      Type             Value
D        dictionary       (Required) The media clip section or media clip data object (the next-
level media object) of which this media clip section object defines a
continuous section.
Alt      array            (Optional) An array that provides alternative text descriptions for the
media clip section in case it cannot be played; see 14.9.2.4, "Multi-
language text arrays"
MH       dictionary       (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 289 — Entries in a
media clip section MH/BE dictionary") shall be honoured for the media
clip section to be considered viable.
BE       dictionary       (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 289 — Entries in a
media clip section MH/BE dictionary") shall only be honoured in a "best
effort" sense.
The B and E entries in the media clip section’s MH and BE dictionaries (see "Table 289 — Entries in a
media clip section MH/BE dictionary") shall define a subsection of the next-level media object
referenced by D by specifying beginning and ending offsets into it. Depending on the media type, the
offsets may be specified by time, frames, or markers (see 13.2.6.2, "Media offset dictionary"). B and E
are not required to specify the same type of offset.
The following rules apply to these offsets:
•    For media types where an offset makes no sense (such as JPEG images), B and E shall be ignored,
with no effect on viability.
•    When B or E are specified by time or frames, their value shall be considered to be relative to the
start of the next-level media clip. However, if E specifies an offset beyond the end of the next-level
media clip, the end value shall be used instead, and there is no effect on viability.
•    When B or E are specified by markers, there shall be a corresponding absolute offset into the
underlying media clip data object. If this offset is not within the range defined by the next-level
media clip (if any), or if the marker is not present in the underlying media clip, the existence of the
entry shall be ignored, and there is no effect on viability.
624                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
•    If the absolute offset derived from the values of all B entries in a media clip section chain is
greater than or equal to the absolute offset derived from the values of all E entries, an empty
range shall be defined. An empty range is valid.
•    Any B or E entry in a media clip section’s MH dictionary shall be honoured at play-time in order
for the media clip section to be considered viable.
NOTE 2        The entry cannot be honoured if its value was not viable or if the player did not support its value;
for example, the player did not support markers.
•    If a B or E entry is in a media clip section’s MH dictionary, all B or E entries, respectively, at
deeper levels (closer to the media clip data), shall be evaluated as if they were in an MH
dictionary (even if they are actually within BE dictionaries).
•    If B or E entry in a BE dictionary cannot be supported, it may be ignored at play-time.
Table 289 — Entries in a media clip section MH/BE dictionary
Key                 Type             Value
B                   dictionary       (Optional) A media offset dictionary (see 13.2.6.2, "Media offset
dictionary") that specifies the offset into the next-level media object
at which the media clip section begins.
Default: the start of the next-level media object.
E                   dictionary       (Optional) A media offset dictionary (see 13.2.6.2, "Media offset
dictionary") that specifies the offset into the next-level media object
at which the media clip section ends.
Default: the end of the next-level media object.
13.2.5             Media play parameters
A media play parameters dictionary specifies how a media object should be played. It shall be
referenced from a media rendition (see 13.2.3.2, "Media renditions").
Table 290 — Entries in a media play parameters dictionary
Key      Type          Value
Type     name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be MediaPlayParams for a media play parameters dictionary.
PL       dictionary    (Optional) A media players dictionary (see 13.2.7.2, "Media players
dictionary") that identifies, among other things, players that are valid and
not valid for playing the media.
If this object is non-viable, the media play parameters dictionary shall be
considered non-viable.
MH       dictionary    (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 291 — Entries in a media
play parameters MH/BE dictionary") shall be honoured for the media play
parameters to be considered viable.
BE       dictionary    (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 291 — Entries in a media
play parameters MH/BE dictionary") shall only be honoured in a "best
effort" sense.
Table 291 — Entries in a media play parameters MH/BE dictionary
Key   Type       Value
V     integer    (Optional) An integer that specifies the desired volume level as a percentage of recorded
volume level. A zero value shall be equivalent to mute; negative values shall not be
permitted. Default value: 100.
C     boolean    (Optional) A flag specifying whether to display a player-specific controller user interface
when playing.
EXAMPLE 1           play/pause/stop controls.
Default value: false
F     integer    (Optional) The manner in which the player shall treat a visual media type that does not
exactly fit the rectangle in which it plays.
0    The media’s width and height shall be scaled while preserving the aspect ratio so
that the media and play rectangles have the greatest possible intersection while
still displaying all media content.
NOTE 1 Same as "meet" value of SMIL’s fit attribute.
1       The media’s width and height shall be scaled while preserving the aspect ratio so
that the play rectangle is entirely filled, and the amount of media content that does
not fit within the play rectangle shall be minimised.
NOTE 2 Same as "slice" value of SMIL’s fit attribute.
2       The media’s width and height shall be scaled independently so that the media and
play rectangles are the same; the aspect ratio shall not be preserved.
NOTE 3 Same as "fill" value of SMIL’s fit attribute.
3       The media shall not be scaled. A scrolling user interface shall be provided if the
media rectangle is wider or taller than the play rectangle.
NOTE 4 Same as "scroll" value of SMIL’s fit attribute.
4       The media shall not be scaled. Only the portions of the media rectangle that
intersect the play rectangle shall be displayed.
NOTE 5 Same as "hidden" value of SMIL’s fit attribute.
5     Use the player’s default setting (author has no preference).
Default value: 5.
An unrecognised value shall be treated as the default value if the entry is in a BE
dictionary. If the entry is in an MH dictionary and it has an unrecognised value, the
object shall be considered non-viable.
D     dictionary (Optional) A media duration dictionary (see "Table 292 — Entries in a media duration
dictionary"). Default value: a dictionary specifying the intrinsic duration (see RC).
A     boolean    (Optional) If true, the media shall automatically play when activated. If false, the media
shall be initially paused when activated.
EXAMPLE 2           The first frame is displayed.
Relevant only for media that may be paused. Default value: true.
626                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key       Type          Value
RC        number        (Optional) Specifies the number of iterations of the duration D to repeat. Negative
values shall be invalid; non-integral values shall be permitted.
NOTE 6 Similar to SMIL’s repeatCount attribute. Zero means repeat forever.
Default value: 1.0.
The value of the D entry is a media duration dictionary, whose entries are shown in "Table 292 —
Entries in a media duration dictionary". It specifies a temporal duration.
NOTE 1      The D entry dictionary temporal duration corresponds to the notion of a simple duration in
SMIL.
The duration may be a specific amount of time, it may be infinity, or it may be the media’s intrinsic
duration.
EXAMPLE            The intrinsic duration of a two-hour QuickTime movie is two hours.
The intrinsic duration may be modified when a media clip section (see 13.2.4.3, "Media clip section") is
used: the intrinsic duration shall be the difference between the absolute begin and end offsets. For a
media type having no notion of time (such as a JPEG image), the duration shall be considered to be
infinity.
If the simple duration is longer than the intrinsic duration, the player shall freeze the media in its final
state until the simple duration has elapsed. For visual media types, the last appearance (frame) shall be
displayed. For aural media types, the media is logically frozen but shall not continue to produce sound.
NOTE 2      In this case, the RC entry, which specifies a repeat count, applies to the simple duration;
therefore, the entire play-pause sequence is repeated RC times.
Table 292 — Entries in a media duration dictionary
Key      Type                Value
Type     name                (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MediaDuration for a media duration dictionary.
S        name                (Required) The subtype of media duration dictionary. Valid values are:
I   The duration is the intrinsic duration of the associated media
F   The duration is infinity
T   The duration shall be specified by the T entry
The media duration dictionary is non-viable if the interactive PDF
processor does not recognise the value of this entry.
T        dictionary          (Required if the value of S is T; otherwise ignored) A timespan dictionary
specifying an explicit duration (see "Table 300 — Entries in a timespan
dictionary"). A negative duration shall not be permitted.
13.2.6             Media screen parameters
13.2.6.1           General
A media screen parameters dictionary (see "Table 293 — Entries in a media screen parameters
dictionary") shall specify where a media object should be played. It shall contain MH and BE
dictionaries (see "Table 294 — Entries in a media screen parameters MH/BE dictionary"), which shall
function as discussed in 13.2.2, "Viability". All media clips that are being played shall be associated with
a particular document and shall be stopped when the document is closed.
Document-based security attacks are possible if windows containing arbitrary media content can be
displayed without indicating to the user that the window is only hosting a media object. This
recommendation can be relaxed if it is possible to communicate the nature of such windows to the
user; for example, with text in a floating window’s title bar.
Table 293 — Entries in a media screen parameters dictionary
Key     Type          Value
Type name             (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present, shall be
MediaScreenParams for a media screen parameters dictionary.
MH      dictionary    (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 294 — Entries in a media screen
parameters MH/BE dictionary") shall be honoured for the media screen parameters
to be considered viable.
BE      dictionary    (Optional) A dictionary whose entries (see "Table 294 — Entries in a media screen
parameters MH/BE dictionary") should be honoured.
Table 294 — Entries in a media screen parameters MH/BE dictionary
Key Type             Value
W        integer     (Optional) The type of window that the media object shall play in. Valid values are:
0    A floating window
1    A full-screen window that obscures all other windows
2    A hidden window
3    The rectangle occupied by the screen annotation (see 12.5.6.18, "Screen annotations")
associated with the media rendition
Default value: 3. Unrecognised value in MH: object is non-viable; in BE: treat as default value.
628                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key Type           Value
B      array       (Optional) An array of three numbers in the range 0.0 to 1.0 that shall specify the components
in the DeviceRGB colour space of the background colour for the rectangle in which the media
is being played. This colour shall be used if the media object does not entirely cover the
rectangle or if it has transparent sections. It shall be ignored for hidden windows.
Default value: implementation-defined. The interactive PDF processor should choose a
reasonable value based on the value of W.
EXAMPLE 1         A system default background colour for floating windows or a user-preferred
background colour for full-screen windows.
If a media format has an intrinsic background colour, B shall not override it. However, the B
colour shall be visible if the media has transparent areas or otherwise does not cover the
entire window.
O      number      (Optional) A number in the range 0.0 to 1.0 specifying the constant opacity value that shall be
used in painting the background colour specified by B. A value below 1.0 means the window
shall be transparent.
EXAMPLE 2         Windows behind a floating window show through if the media does not cover the
entire floating window.
A value of 0.0 shall indicate full transparency and shall make B irrelevant. It shall be ignored
for full-screen and hidden windows.
Default value: 1.0 (fully opaque).
M      integer     (Optional) A monitor specifier (see "Table 304 — Monitor specifier values") that shall specify
which monitor in a multi-monitor system, a floating or full-screen window shall appear on.
Ignored for other types.
Default value: 0 (document monitor). Unrecognised value in MH: object is non-viable; in BE:
treat as default value.
F      dictionary (Required if the value of W is 0; otherwise ignored) A floating window parameters dictionary
(see "Table 295 — Entries in a floating window parameters dictionary") that shall specify the
size, position, and options used in displaying floating windows.
The F entry in the media screen parameters MH/BE dictionaries shall be a floating window parameters
dictionary, whose entries are listed in "Table 295 — Entries in a floating window parameters
dictionary". The entries in the floating window parameters dictionary shall be treated as if they were
present in the MH or BE dictionaries that they are referenced from. That is, the contained entries shall
be individually evaluated for viability rather than the dictionary being evaluated as a whole. (There
may be an F entry in both MH and BE. In such a case, if a given entry is present in both floating window
parameters dictionaries, the one in the MH dictionary shall take precedence.)
The D, P, and RT entries shall be used to specify the rectangle that the floating window occupies. Once
created, the floating window’s size and position shall not be tied to any other window, even if the initial
size or position was computed relative to other windows.
Unrecognised values for the R, P, RT, and O entries shall be handled as follows: if they are nested
within an MH dictionary, the floating window parameters object (and hence the media screen
parameters object) shall be considered non-viable; if they are nested within a BE dictionary, they shall
be considered to have their default values.
Table 295 — Entries in a floating window parameters dictionary
Key    Type      Value
Type   name      (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present, shall be
FWParams for a floating window parameters dictionary.
D      array     (Required) An array containing two non-negative integers that shall represent the
floating window’s width and height, in pixels, respectively. These values shall
correspond to the dimensions of the rectangle in which the media shall play, not
including such items as title bar and resizing handles.
RT     integer   (Optional) The window relative to which the floating window shall be positioned.
Valid values are:
0    The document window
1    The application window
2    The full virtual desktop
3    The monitor specified by M in the media screen parameters MH or BE
dictionary (see "Table 294 — Entries in a media screen parameters MH/BE
dictionary") Default value: 0.
P      integer   (Optional) The location where the floating window (including such items as title bar
and resizing handles) shall be positioned relative to the window specified by RT.
Valid values are:
0    Upper-left corner
1    Upper centre
2    Upper-right corner
3    Centre left
4    Centre
5    Centre right
6    Lower-left corner
7    Lower centre
8    Lower-right corner
Default value: 4.
O      integer   (Optional) Specifies what shall occur if the floating window is positioned totally or
partially offscreen (that is, not visible on any physical monitor). Valid values are:
0    Take no special action
1    Move and/or resize the window so that it is on-screen
2    Consider the object to be non-viable
Default value: 1.
T      boolean (Optional) If true, the floating window shall have a title bar.
Default value: true.
UC     boolean (Optional; meaningful only if T is true) If true, the floating window shall include user
interface elements that allow a user to close a floating window.
Default value: true
630                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type        Value
R          integer     (Optional) Specifies whether the floating window may be resized by a user. Valid
values are:
0    May not be resized
1    May be resized only if aspect ratio is preserved
2    May be resized without preserving aspect ratio
Default value: 0.
TT         array       (Optional; meaningful only if T is true) An array providing text to display on the
floating window’s title bar. See 14.9.2.4, "Multi-language text arrays" If this entry is
not present, the interactive PDF processor may provide default text.
13.2.6.2            Media offset dictionary
A media offset dictionary ("Table 296 — Entries common to all media offset dictionaries") shall specify
an offset into a media object. The S (subtype) entry indicates how the offset shall be specified: in terms
of time, frames or markers. Different media types support different types of offsets.
EXAMPLE            Time, "10 seconds"; frames, "frame 20"; markers, "Chapter One."
Table 296 — Entries common to all media offset dictionaries
Key      Type                Value
Type     name                (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MediaOffset for a media offset dictionary.
S        name                (Required) The subtype of media offset dictionary. Valid values shall be:
T    A media offset time dictionary (see "Table 297 — Additional
entries in a media offset time dictionary")
F    A media offset frame dictionary (see "Table 298 — Additional
entries in a media offset frame dictionary")
M A media offset marker dictionary (see "Table 299 — Additional
entries in a media offset marker dictionary")
The rendition is non-viable if the interactive PDF processor does not
recognise the value of this entry.
Table 297 — Additional entries in a media offset time dictionary
Key      Type                Value
T        dictionary          (Required) A timespan dictionary (see "Table 300 — Entries in a
timespan dictionary") that shall specify a temporal offset into a media
object. Negative timespans are prohibited in this context. The media
offset time dictionary is non-viable if its timespan dictionary is non-
viable.
Table 298 — Additional entries in a media offset frame dictionary
Key    Type            Value
F      integer         (Required) Shall specify a frame within a media object. Frame numbers
begin at 0; negative frame numbers are out of range.
Table 299 — Additional entries in a media offset marker dictionary
Key    Type            Value
M      text string     (Required) A text string that identifies a named offset within a media
object.
13.2.6.3       Timespan dictionary
A timespan dictionary shall specify a length of time; its entries are shown in "Table 300 — Entries in a
timespan dictionary".
Table 300 — Entries in a timespan dictionary
Key    Type            Value
Type   name            (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be Timespan for a timespan dictionary.
S      name            (Required) The subtype of timespan dictionary. The value shall be S
(simple timespan). The rendition is non-viable if the interactive PDF
processor does not recognise the value of this entry.
V      number          (Required) The number of seconds in the timespan. Non-integral values
shall be allowed. Negative values shall not be used.
This entry shall be used only if the value of the S entry is S. Subtypes
defined in the future need not use this entry.
13.2.7         Other multimedia objects
13.2.7.1       General
This subclause defines several dictionary types that are referenced by the previous subclauses.
13.2.7.2       Media players dictionary
13.2.7.2.1     General
A media players dictionary may be referenced by media clip data (see 13.2.4.2, "Media clip data") and
media play parameters (see 13.2.5, "Media play parameters") dictionaries, and shall allow them to
specify which players may or may not be used to play the associated media. The media players
dictionary (see “Table 301 — Entries in a media players dictionary”) references media player info
632                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
dictionaries (see 13.2.7.3, "Media player info dictionary") that shall provide specific information about
each player.
Table 301 — Entries in a media players dictionary
Key      Type               Value
Type     name               (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MediaPlayers for a media players dictionary.
MU       array              (Optional) An array of media player info dictionaries (see "Table 302 —
Entries in a media player info dictionary") that shall specify a set of
players, one of which shall be used in playing the associated media
object.
Any players specified in NU are effectively removed from MU.
EXAMPLE            If MU specifies versions 1 through 5 of a player and NU
specifies versions 1 and 2 of the same player, MU is effectively
versions 3 through 5.
A        array              (Optional) An array of media player info dictionaries (see "Table 302 —
Entries in a media player info dictionary") that shall specify a set of
players, any of which may be used in playing the associated media
object. If MU is also present and non-empty, A shall be ignored.
NU       array              (Optional) An array of media player info dictionaries (see "Table 302 —
Entries in a media player info dictionary") that shall specify a set of
players that shall not be used in playing the associated media object
(even if they are also specified in MU).
The MU, A, and NU entries each shall specify one or more media player info dictionaries. An empty
array shall be treated as if it is not present. The media player info dictionaries shall be allowed to
specify overlapping player ranges.
NOTE         MU could contain a media player info dictionary describing versions 1 to 10 of Player X and
another describing versions 3 through 5 of Player X.
If a non-viable media player info dictionary is referenced by MU, NU, or A, it shall be treated as if it
were not present in its original array, and a media player info dictionary containing the same software
identifier dictionary (see 13.2.7.4, "Software identifier dictionary") shall logically considered present in
NU. The same rule shall apply to a media player info dictionary that contains a partially unrecognised
software identifier dictionary.
Since both media clip data and media play parameters dictionaries may be employed in a play
operation, and each may reference a media players dictionary, there is a potential for conflict between
the contents of the two media players dictionaries.
13.2.7.2.2        Algorithm: Media Player
At play-time, the viewer shall use the following algorithm to determine whether a player present on
the machine may be employed. The player may not be used if any of the following conditions are true:
a) The content type is known and the player does not support the type.
b) The player is found in the NU array of either dictionary.
c) Both dictionaries have non-empty MU arrays and the player is not found in both of them, or only one of
the dictionaries has a non-empty MU array and the player is not found in it.
d) Neither dictionary has a non-empty MU array, the content type is not known, and the player is not found
in the A array of either dictionary.
If none of the conditions are true, the player may be used.
NOTE        A player is "found" in the NU, MU, or A arrays if it matches the information found in the PID
entry of one of the entries, as described by the Algorithm in 13.2.7.4, "Software identifier
dictionary".
13.2.7.3         Media player info dictionary
A media player info dictionary shall provide a variety of information regarding a specific media player.
Its entries (see "Table 302 — Entries in a media player info dictionary") shall associate information
with a particular version or range of versions of a player. The PID entry shall provide information
about the player, as described in 13.2.7.4, "Software identifier dictionary".
Table 302 — Entries in a media player info dictionary
Key      Type            Value
Type     name            (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be MediaPlayerInfo for a media player info dictionary.
PID      dictionary      (Required) A software identifier dictionary (see 13.2.7.4, "Software
identifier dictionary") that shall specify the player name, versions, and
operating systems to which this media player info dictionary applies.
MH       dictionary      (Optional) A dictionary containing entries that shall be honoured for this
dictionary to be considered viable
Currently, there are no defined entries for this dictionary
BE       dictionary      (Optional) A dictionary containing entries that need only be honoured in
a "best effort" sense.
Currently, there are no defined entries for this dictionary
13.2.7.4         Software identifier dictionary
13.2.7.4.1       General
A software identifier dictionary shall allow software to be identified by name, range of versions, and
operating systems; its entries are listed in "Table 303 — Entries in a software identifier dictionary". An
interactive PDF processor uses this information to determine whether a given media player may be
used in a given situation. If the dictionary contains keys that are unrecognised by the interactive PDF
processor, it shall be considered to be partially recognised. The interactive PDF processor may or may
not decide to treat the software identifier as viable, depending on the context in which it is used.
634                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 303 — Entries in a software identifier dictionary
Key      Type               Value
Type     name               (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be SoftwareIdentifier for a software identifier dictionary.
U        ASCII string       (Required) A URI that identifies a piece of software (see 13.2.7.4.3,
"Software URIs").
L        array              (Optional) The lower bound of the range of software versions that this
software identifier dictionary specifies (see 13.2.7.4.4, "Version arrays").
Default value: the array [0].
LI       boolean            (Optional) If true, the lower bound of the interval defined by L and H is
inclusive; that is, the software version shall be greater than or equal to L
(see 13.2.7.4.4, "Version arrays"). If false, it shall not be inclusive.
Default value: true.
H        array              (Optional) The upper bound of the range of software versions that this
software identifier dictionary specifies (see 13.2.7.4.4, "Version arrays").
Default value: an empty array [].
HI       boolean            (Optional) If true, the upper bound of the interval defined by L and H is
inclusive; that is, the software version shall be less than or equal to H
(see 13.2.7.4.4, "Version arrays"). If false, it shall not be inclusive.
Default value: true.
OS       array              (Optional) An array of byte strings representing operating system
identifiers that shall indicate to which operating systems this object
applies. The defined values are the same as those defined for SMIL 3.0’s
systemOperatingSystem attribute. There may not be multiple copies of
the same identifier in the array. An empty array represents all operating
systems. Default value: an empty array.
13.2.7.4.2        Algorithm: software identifier
The following procedure shall be used to determine whether a piece of software is considered to match
a software identifier dictionary:
a) The software name shall match the name specified by the U entry (see 13.2.7.4.3, "Software URIs").
b) The software version shall be within the interval specified by the L, H, LI, and HI entries (see 13.2.7.4.4,
"Version arrays").
c) The machine’s operating system name shall be an exact match for one present in the OS array. If the
array is not present or empty, a match shall also be considered to exist.
13.2.7.4.3        Software URIs
The U entry is a URI (universal resource identifier) that identifies a piece of software. It shall be
interpreted according to its scheme; the only presently defined scheme is vnd.adobe.swname. The
scheme name is case-insensitive; if it is not recognised by the interactive PDF processor, the software
shall be considered a non-match. The syntax of URIs of this scheme is
"vnd.adobe.swname:" software_name
where software_name shall be reg_name as defined in Internet RFC 3986. Also, software_name shall be a
sequence of UTF-8-encoded characters that have been escaped with one pass of URL escaping (see
14.10.3.2, "URL strings"). That is, to recover the original software name, software_name shall be
unescaped and then treated as a sequence of UTF-8 characters. The actual software names shall be
compared in a case-sensitive fashion.
Software names shall be second-class names (see Annex E, "Extending PDF").
EXAMPLE          The URI for Adobe Acrobat is
vnd.adobe.swname:ADBE_Acrobat.
13.2.7.4.4       Version arrays
The L, H, LI, and HI entries shall be used to specify a range of software versions. L and H shall be
version arrays containing zero or more non-negative integers representing subversion numbers. The
first integer shall be the major version numbers, and subsequent integers shall be increasingly minor.
H shall be greater than or equal to L, according to the following rules for comparing version arrays:
Algorithm: Comparing version arrays
An empty version array shall be treated as infinity; that is, it shall be considered greater than any other
version array except another empty array. Two empty arrays are equal.
When comparing arrays that contain different numbers of elements, the smaller array shall be
implicitly padded with zero-valued integers to make the number of elements equal.
EXAMPLE          When comparing [5 1 2 3 4] to [5], the latter is treated as [5 0 0 0 0].
The corresponding elements of the arrays shall be compared, starting with the first. When a difference
is found, the array containing the larger element shall be considered to have the larger version
number. If no differences are found, the versions are equal.
If a version array contains negative numbers, it is non-viable, as is the enclosing software identifier.
13.2.7.5         Monitor specifier
A monitor specifier is an integer that shall identify a physical monitor attached to a system. It may have
one of the values in "Table 304 — Monitor specifier values".
Table 304 — Monitor specifier values
Value Description
0        The monitor containing the largest section of the document window
1        The monitor containing the smallest section of the document window
2        Primary monitor. If no monitor is considered primary, shall treat as case 0
3        Monitor with the greatest colour depth
4        Monitor with the greatest area (in pixels squared)
636                                                                                           © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Value Description
5        Monitor with the greatest height (in pixels)
6        Monitor with the greatest width (in pixels)
For some of these values, it is possible have a "tie" at play-time; for example, two monitors might have
the same colour depth. Ties may be broken in an implementation-dependent manner.
13.3 Sounds
The features described in this subclause are deprecated with PDF 2.0. They are superseded by the
general multimedia framework described in 13.2, "Multimedia".
A sound object (PDF 1.2) shall be a stream containing sample values that define a sound to be played
through the computer’s speakers. The Sound entry in a sound annotation or sound action dictionary
(see "Table 188 — Additional entries specific to a sound annotation" and "Table 212 — Additional
entries specific to a sound action") shall identify a sound object representing the sound to be played
when the annotation is activated.
Since a sound object is a stream, it may contain any of the standard entries common to all streams, as
described in "Table 5 — Entries common to all stream dictionaries". In particular, if it contains an F
(file specification) entry, the sound shall be defined in an external file. This sound file shall be self-
describing, containing all information needed to render the sound; no additional information need be
present in the PDF file.
NOTE         The AIFF, AIFF-C (Mac OS), RIFF (.wav), and snd (.au) file formats are all self-describing.
If no F entry is present, the sound object itself shall contain the sample data and all other information
needed to define the sound. “Table 305 — Additional entries specific to a sound object” shows the
additional dictionary entries specific to a sound object.
Table 305 — Additional entries specific to a sound object
Key         Type             Value
Type        name             (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be Sound for a sound object.
R           number           (Required) The sampling rate, in samples per second.
C           integer          (Optional) The number of sound channels. Default value: 1.
B           integer          (Optional) The number of bits per sample value per channel. Default value: 8.
Key        Type        Value
E          name        (Optional) The encoding format for the sample data:
Raw          Unspecified or unsigned values in the range 0 to 2B - 1
Signed       Twos-complement values
muLaw        m-law–encoded samples
ALaw         A-law–encoded samples
Default value: Raw.
CO         name        (Optional) The sound compression format used on the sample data. (This is
separate from any stream compression specified by the sound object’s Filter
entry; see "Table 5 — Entries common to all stream dictionaries" and 7.4,
"Filters") If this entry is absent, sound compression shall not be used; the data
contains sampled waveforms that shall be played at R samples per second per
channel.
CP         (various)   (Optional) Optional parameters specific to the sound compression format
used.
No standard values have been defined for the CO and CP entries.
Sample values shall be stored in the stream with the most significant bits first (big-endian order for
samples larger than 8 bits). Samples that are not a multiple of 8 bits shall be packed into consecutive
bytes, starting at the most significant end. If a sample extends across a byte boundary, the most
significant bits shall be placed in the first byte, followed by less significant bits in subsequent bytes. For
dual-channel stereophonic sounds, the samples shall be stored in an interleaved format, with each
sample value for the left (channel 1) preceding the corresponding sample for the right (channel 2).
To maximise the portability of PDF documents containing embedded sounds, interactive PDF
processors should support at least the following formats (assuming the platform has sufficient
hardware and OS support to play sounds at all):
R         8000, 11,025, or 22,050 samples per second
C         1 or 2 channels
B         8 or 16 bits per channel
E         Raw, Signed, or muLaw encoding
If the encoding (E) is Raw or Signed, R shall be 11,025 or 22,050 samples per channel. If the encoding is
muLaw, R shall be 8000 samples per channel, C shall be 1 channel, and B shall be 8 bits per channel.
Sound players shall convert between formats, downsample rates, and combine channels as necessary
to render sound on the target platform.
13.4 Movies
The features described in this subclause are deprecated with PDF 2.0. They are superseded by the
general multimedia framework described in 13.2, "Multimedia".
638                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
PDF may embed movies within a document by means of movie annotations (see 12.5.6.17, "Movie
annotations"). Despite the name, a movie may consist entirely of sound with no visible images to be
displayed on the screen. The Movie and A (activation) entries in the movie annotation dictionary shall
refer, respectively, to a movie dictionary ("Table 306 — Entries in a movie dictionary") that shall
describe the static characteristics of the movie and a movie activation dictionary ("Table 307 — Entries
in a movie activation dictionary") that shall specify how it shall be presented.
Table 306 — Entries in a movie dictionary
Key         Type                       Value
F           file specification         (Required) A file specification identifying a self-describing movie file.
The format of a self-describing movie file shall be left unspecified, and
there is no guarantee of portability.
Aspect      array                      (Optional) The width and height of the movie’s bounding box, in pixels,
and shall be specified as [width height]. This entry should be omitted
for a movie consisting entirely of sound with no visible images.
Rotate      integer                    (Optional) The number of degrees by which the movie shall be rotated
clockwise relative to the page. The value shall be a multiple of 90.
Default value: 0.
Poster      boolean or stream          (Optional) A flag or stream specifying whether and how a poster image
representing the movie shall be displayed. If this value is a stream, it
shall contain an image XObject (see 8.9, "Images") to be displayed as the
poster. If it is the boolean value true, the poster image shall be retrieved
from the movie file; if it is false, no poster shall be displayed. Default
value: false.
Table 307 — Entries in a movie activation dictionary
Key                Type          Value
Start              (various)     (Optional) The starting time shall be nominally a non-negative 64-bit
integer, specified as follows:
•    If it is representable as a 32 bit integer, it shall be specified as such.
•    If it is not representable as a 32 bit integer, it shall be specified as an 8-byte
string representing a 64-bit twos-complement integer, most significant byte
first.
•    If it is expressed in a time scale different from that of the movie itself, it shall
be represented as an array of two values: an integer or byte string denoting
the starting time, followed by an integer specifying the time scale in units per
second.
If this entry is omitted, the movie shall be played from the beginning.
Duration           (various)     (Optional) The duration of the movie segment to be played, that shall be
specified in the same form as Start. If this entry is omitted, the movie shall
be played to the end.
Rate               number        (Optional) The initial speed at which to play the movie. If the value of this
entry is negative, the movie shall be played backward with respect to Start
and Duration. Default value: 1.0.
Key             Type       Value
Volume          number     (Optional) The initial sound volume at which to play the movie, in the range
-1.0 to 1.0. Higher values shall denote greater volume; negative values shall
mute the sound. Default value: 1.0.
ShowControls boolean       (Optional) A flag specifying whether to display a movie controller bar while
playing the movie. Default value: false.
Mode            name       (Optional) The play mode for playing the movie:
Once           Play once and stop.
Open           Play and leave the movie controller bar open.
Repeat         Play repeatedly from beginning to end until stopped.
Palindrome Play continuously forward and backward until stopped.
Default value: Once.
Synchronous     boolean    (Optional) A flag specifying whether to play the movie synchronously or
asynchronously. If this value is true, the movie player shall retain control
until the movie is completed or dismissed by the user. If the value is false,
the player shall return control to the interactive PDF processor
immediately after starting the movie. Default value: false.
FWScale         array      (Optional) The magnification (zoom) factor at which the movie shall be
played. The presence of this entry implies that the movie shall be played in
a floating window. If the entry is absent, the movie shall be played in the
annotation rectangle.
The value of the entry shall be an array of two positive integers, [numerator
denominator], denoting a rational magnification factor for the movie. The
final window size, in pixels, shall be (numerator ÷ denominator) × Aspect
where the value of Aspect shall be taken from the movie dictionary (see
"Table 306 — Entries in a movie dictionary").
FWPosition      array      (Optional) For floating play windows, the relative position of the window
on the screen. The value shall be an array of two numbers [horiz vert] each
in the range 0.0 to 1.0, denoting the relative horizontal and vertical position
of the movie window with respect to the screen.
EXAMPLE            The value [0.5 0.5] centres the window on the screen.
Default value: [0.5 0.5].
13.5 Alternate presentations
The features described in this clause are deprecated with PDF 2.0.
Beginning with PDF 1.4, a PDF document may contain alternate presentations, which specify alternative
ways in which the document may be viewed. The optional AlternatePresentations entry (PDF 1.4) in
a document’s name dictionary (see "Table 32 — Entries in the name dictionary") contains a name tree
that maps name strings to the alternate presentations available for the document.
Since PDF processors are not required to support alternate presentations, authors of documents
containing alternate presentations should define the files such that something useful and meaningful
640                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
can be displayed and printed. For example, if the document contains an alternate presentation
slideshow of a sequence of photographs, the photographs should be viewable in a static form by
viewers that are not capable of playing the slideshow.
As of PDF 1.5, the only type of alternate presentation is a slideshow. Slideshows may be invoked by
means of JavaScript actions (see 12.6.4.17, "ECMAScript actions") initiated by user action on an
interactive form element (see 12.7, "Forms").
"Table 308 — Entries in a slideshow dictionary" shows the entries in a slideshow dictionary.
Table 308 — Entries in a slideshow dictionary
Key                 Type           Value
Type                Name           (Required; PDF 1.4) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall
be SlideShow for a slideshow dictionary.
Subtype             Name           (Required; PDF 1.4) The subtype of the PDF object that this dictionary
describes; shall be Embedded for a slideshow dictionary.
Resources           name           (Required; PDF 1.4) A name tree that maps name strings to objects referenced
tree           by the alternate presentation. Even though PDF treats the strings in the name
tree as strings without a specified encoding, the slideshow shall interpret them
as UTF-8 encoded Unicode.
StartResource       byte           (Required; PDF 1.4) A byte string that shall match one of the strings in the
string         Resources entry. It shall define the root object for the slideshow presentation.
NOTE 1      The Resources name tree represents a virtual file system to the slideshow. It associates strings
(“file names”) with PDF objects that represent resources used by the slideshow. For example, a
root stream can reference a file name, which would be looked up in the Resources name tree,
and the corresponding object would be loaded as the file. (This virtual file system is flat; that is,
there is no way to reference subfolders.)
NOTE 2      Typically, images are stored in the document as image XObjects (see 8.9.5, "Image dictionaries"),
thereby allowing them to be shared between the standard PDF representation and the
slideshow. Other media objects are stored or embedded file streams (see 7.11.4, "Embedded file
streams").
To allow PDF processors to verify content against their own supported features, all referenced objects
shall include a Type entry in their dictionary, even when the Type entry is normally optional for a
given object.
EXAMPLE           The following example illustrates the use of alternate presentation slideshows.
1 0 obj
<</Type /Catalog
/Pages 2 0 R
/Names 3 0 R                                                %Indirect reference to name dictionary
…
>>
endobj
3 0 obj                                                              %The name dictionary
<</AlternatePresentations 4 0 R>>
endobj
4 0 obj                                                      %The alternate presentations name tree
<</Names [(MySlideShow) 5 0 R]>>
endobj
5 0 obj                                                      %The slideshow definition
<</Type /SlideShow
/Subtype /Embedded
/Resources <</Names [(mysvg.svg) 31 0R
(abc0001.jpg) 35 0 R
(abc0002.jpg) 36 0 R
(mysvg.js) 61 0 R
(mymusic.mp3) 65 0 R
]
>>
/StartResource (mysvg.svg)
>>
endobj
31 0 obj
<</Type /Filespec                                      %The root object, which
/F (mysvg.svg)                                      %points to an embedded file stream
/EF <</F 32 0 R>>
>>
endobj
32 0 obj                                                     %The embedded file stream
<</Type /EmbeddedFile
/Subtype /image#2Fsvg+xml
/Length 72
>>
stream
<?xml version="1.0" standalone="no"?>
<svg><!- Some SVG goes here -></svg>
endstream
endobj
% … other objects not shown …
13.6 3D Artwork
13.6.1          General
Starting with PDF 1.6, collections of three-dimensional objects, such as those used by CAD software,
may be embedded in PDF files. Such collections are often called 3D models; in the context of PDF, they
shall be referred to as 3D artwork. The PDF constructs for 3D artwork support the following features:
•    3D artwork may be rendered within a page; that is, not as a separate window or user interface
element.
•    Multiple instances of 3D artwork may appear within a page or document.
•    Specific views of 3D artwork may be specified, including a default view that shall be displayed
initially and other views that may be selected. Views may have names that can be presented in a
user interface.
•    (PDF 1.7) PDF documents may specify how embedded 3D artwork shall be rendered, coloured, lit,
and cross-sectioned, without the use of embedded ECMAScript. They may also specify state
information that shall be applied to individual nodes (3D graphics objects or collections thereof)
in the 3D artwork, such as visibility, opacity, position, or orientation.
•    Pages containing 3D artwork may be printed.
642                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
•    Users may pan, zoom and rotate the artwork, enabling them to examine complex objects from any
angle or orientation.
•    (PDF 1.7) Keyframe animations contained in 3D artwork may be played in specific styles and
timescales, without programmatic intervention.
•    ECMAScripts and other software may programmatically manipulate objects in the artwork,
creating dynamic presentations in which objects move, spin, appear, and disappear. See ISO/DIS
21757-1.
•    (PDF 1.7) The activation of 3D artwork can trigger the display of additional user interface items in
an interactive PDF processor. Such items may include model trees and toolbars.
•    Two-dimensional (2D) content such as labels may be overlaid on 3D artwork. This feature is not
the same as the ability to apply 2D markup annotations.
•    (PDF 1.7) 2D markup annotations may be applied to specific views of the 3D artwork, using the
ExData entry to identify the 3D annotation and the 3D view in that annotation.
The following subclauses describe the major PDF objects that relate to 3D artwork, as well as providing
background information on 3D graphics:
•    3D annotations provide a virtual camera through which the artwork shall be viewed. (see13.6.2
13.6.2, "3D Annotations").
•    3D streams shall contain the actual specification of a piece of 3D artwork (see 13.6.3, "3D
streams"). This specification supports the Standard ECMA-363, Universal 3D file format developed
by the 3D Industry Forum. PDF 2.0 extends PDF to support the ISO 14739-1 Product
Representation Compact (PRC) file format.
•    3D views shall specify information about the relationship between the camera and the 3D artwork
(see 13.6.4, "3D views"). Beginning with PDF 1.7, views may also describe additional parameters
such as render mode, lighting, cross sections, and nodes. Nodes shall be 3D graphic objects or
collections thereof.
•    3D coordinate systems are described in 13.6.5, "Coordinate systems for 3D"
•    2D markup annotations applied to 3D artwork views are described in 13.6.6, "3D markup"
NOTE        Many of the concepts and terminology of 3D rendering are beyond the scope of this reference.
Readers interested in further information are encouraged to consult outside references.
13.6.2            3D annotations
3D annotations (PDF 1.6) are a way to include 3D artwork in PDF documents. Rich media annotations
are another method (see 0 "
Rich media"). "Table 309 — Additional entries specific to a 3D annotation" shows the entries specific to
a 3D annotation dictionary. "Table 166 — Entries common to all annotation dictionaries" describes the
entries common to all annotation dictionaries.
In addition to these entries, a 3D annotation shall provide an appearance stream in its AP entry (see
"Table 166 — Entries common to all annotation dictionaries") that has a normal appearance (the N
entry in "Table 170 — Entries in an appearance dictionary"). This appearance may be used by
applications that do not support 3D annotations and by all applications for the initial display of the
annotation.
Table 309 — Additional entries specific to a 3D annotation
Key       Type         Value
Subtype   name         (Required) The type of annotation that this dictionary describes; shall
be 3D for a 3D annotation.
3DD       stream or    (Required) A 3D stream (see 13.6.3, "3D streams") or 3D reference
dictionary   dictionary (see 13.6.3.3, "3D reference dictionaries") that specifies the
3D artwork to be shown.
3DV       (various)    (Optional) An object that specifies the default initial view of the 3D
artwork that shall be used when the annotation is activated. It may be
either a 3D view dictionary (see 13.6.4, "3D views") or one of the
following types specifying an element in the VA array in the 3D stream
(see "Table 311 — Entries in a 3D stream dictionary"):
•    An integer specifying an index into the VA array.
•    A text string matching the IN entry in one of the views in the VA array.
•    A name that indicates the first (F), last (L), or default (D) entries in the
VA array.
Default value: the default view in the 3D stream object specified by
3DD.
3DA       dictionary   (Optional) An activation dictionary (see "Table 310 — Entries in a 3D
activation dictionary") that defines the times at which the annotation
shall be activated and deactivated and the state of the 3D artwork
instance at those times. Default value: an activation dictionary
containing default values for all its entries.
3DI       boolean      (Optional) A flag indicating the primary use of the 3D annotation. If
true, it is intended to be interactive; if false, it is intended to be
manipulated programmatically, as with an ECMAScript animation.
Interactive PDF processors may present different user interface
controls for interactive 3D annotations (for example, to rotate, pan, or
zoom the artwork) than for those managed by a script or other
mechanism.
Default value: true.
3DB       rectangle    (Optional) The 3D view box, which is the rectangular area in which the
3D artwork shall be drawn. It shall be within the rectangle specified by
the annotation’s Rect entry and shall be expressed in the annotation’s
target coordinate system (see discussion following this Table).
Default value: the annotation’s Rect entry, expressed in the target
coordinate system. This value is [-w/2 -h/2 w/2 h/2], where w and h are
the width and height, respectively, of Rect.
3DU       dictionary   (Optional; PDF 2.0) A 3D units dictionary that specifies the units
definitions for the 3D data associated with this annotation. See "Table
325 — Entries in a 3D units dictionary".
GEO       dictionary   (Optional; PDF 2.0) For Geospatial3D requirement type, a geospatial
information section may be present as an attribute within a 3D
Annotation. There are further conditions placed on the GPTS and LPTS
arrays within the geo-reference coordinate tables to include 3D point
values. See 12.10.2, "Geospatial measure dictionary".
644                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
The 3DB entry specifies the 3D view box, a rectangle in which the 3D artwork appears. The view box
shall fit within the annotation’s rectangle (specified by its Rect entry). It may be the same size, or it
may be smaller if necessary to provide extra drawing area for additional 2D graphics within the
annotation.
NOTE 1      Although 3D artwork can internally specify viewport size, interactive PDF processors ignore it in
favour of information provided by the 3DB entry.
The view box shall be specified in the annotation’s target coordinate system, whose origin is at the
centre of the annotation’s rectangle. Units in this coordinate system are the same as default user space
units. Therefore, the coordinates of the annotation’s rectangle in the target coordinate system are
[-w/2 -h/2 w/2 h/2]
given w and h as the rectangle’s width and height.
The 3DD entry shall specify a 3D stream that contains the 3D artwork to be shown in the annotation;
3D streams are described in 13.6.3, "3D streams". The 3DD entry may specify a 3D stream directly; it
may also specify a 3D stream indirectly by means of a 3D reference dictionary (see 13.6.3.3, "3D
reference dictionaries"). These options control whether annotations shall share the same run-time
instance of the artwork.
The 3DV entry shall specify the view of the 3D artwork that is displayed when the annotation is
activated (as described in the next paragraph). 3D views, which are described in 13.6.4, "3D views",
represent settings for the virtual camera, such as position, orientation, and projection style. The view
specified by 3DV shall be one of the 3D view dictionaries listed in the VA entry in a 3D stream (see
"Table 311 — Entries in a 3D stream dictionary").
The 3DA entry shall be an activation dictionary (see "Table 310 — Entries in a 3D activation
dictionary") that determines how the state of the annotation and its associated artwork may change.
NOTE 2      These states serve to delay the processing or display of 3D artwork until a user chooses to
interact with it. Such delays in activating 3D artwork can be advantageous to performance.
At any given moment, a 3D annotation shall be in one of two states:
•    Inactive (the default initial state): the annotation displays the annotation’s normal appearance.
NOTE 3      It is typical, though not required, for the normal appearance to be a pre-rendered bitmap of the
default view of the 3D artwork. PDF writers need to provide bitmaps of appropriate resolution
for all intended uses of the document; for example, a high-resolution bitmap for high-quality
printing and a screen-resolution bitmap for on-screen viewing. Optional content (see 8.11,
"Optional content") can be used to select the appropriate bitmap for each situation.
•    Active: the annotation displays a rendering of the 3D artwork. This rendering shall be specified by
the annotation’s 3DV entry.
Table 310 — Entries in a 3D activation dictionary
Key       Type       Value
A         name       (Optional) A name specifying the circumstances under which the annotation
shall be activated. Valid values are:
PO The annotation shall be activated as soon as the page containing the
annotation is opened.
PV The annotation shall be activated as soon as any part of the page
containing the annotation becomes visible.
XA The annotation shall remain inactive until explicitly activated by a script
or user action.
At any one time, only a single page shall be considered open in an interactive
PDF processor, even though more than one page might be visible, depending
on the page layout.
Default value: XA.
For performance reasons, documents intended for viewing in a web browser
should use explicit activation (XA). In non-interactive applications, such as
printing systems or aggregating interactive PDF processors, PO and PV
indicate that the annotation shall be activated when the page is printed or
placed; XA indicates that the annotation shall never be activated and the
normal appearance shall be used.
AIS       name       (Optional) A name specifying the state of the artwork instance upon activation
of the annotation. Valid values are:
I    The artwork shall be instantiated, but real-time script-driven animations
shall be disabled.
L    Real-time script-driven animations shall be enabled if present; if not, the
artwork shall be instantiated.
Default value: L.
In non-interactive PDF processors, the artwork shall be instantiated and
scripts shall be disabled.
D         name       (Optional) A name specifying the circumstances under which the annotation
shall be deactivated. Valid values are:
PC The annotation shall be deactivated as soon as the page is closed.
PI The annotation shall be deactivated as soon as the page containing the
annotation becomes invisible.
XD The annotation shall remain active until explicitly deactivated by a script
or user action.
At any one time, only a single page shall be considered open in an interactive
PDF processor, even though more than one page might be visible, depending
on the page layout.
Default value: PI.
646                                                                                © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key             Type          Value
DIS             name          (Optional) A name specifying the state of the artwork instance upon
deactivation of the annotation. Valid values are:
U    uninstantiated
I    instantiated
L    live
Default value: U.
NOTE 1 If the value of this entry is L, uninstantiation of instantiated artwork is
necessary unless it has been modified. Uninstantiation is never required in
non-interactive PDF processors.
TB              boolean       (Optional; PDF 1.7) A flag indicating the default behavior of an interactive
toolbar associated with this annotation. If true, a toolbar shall be displayed by
default when the annotation is activated and given focus. If false, a toolbar
shall not be displayed by default.
NOTE 2 Typically, a toolbar is positioned in proximity to the 3D annotation.
Default value: true
NP              boolean       (Optional; PDF 1.7) A flag indicating the default behavior of the user interface
for viewing or managing information about the 3D artwork. Such user
interfaces can enable navigation to different views or can depict the hierarchy
of the objects in the artwork (the model tree). If true, the user interface
should be made visible when the annotation is activated. If false, the user
interface should not be made visible by default.
Default value: false
Style           name          (Optional; PDF 2.0) The value shall be either Embedded or Windowed. An
interactive PDF processor shall support both Embedded and Windowed.
Default value: Embedded
Window          dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaWindow Dictionary that describes the size
and position of the floating user interface window when the value for Style is
set to Windowed. See "Table 339 — Entries in a RichMediaWindow
dictionary" for a detailed description.
Transparent boolean           (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates whether the interactive PDF
processor shall display the underlying page content through the transparent
areas of the rich media content (where the alpha value is less than 1.0).
Default value: false
The A and D entries of the activation dictionary determine when a 3D annotation may become active
and inactive. The AIS and DIS entries determine what state the associated artwork shall be in when the
annotation is activated or deactivated. 3D artwork may be in one of three states:
•    Uninstantiated: the initial state of the artwork before it has been used in any way.
•    Instantiated: the state in which the artwork has been read and a run-time instance of the artwork
has been created. In this state, it may be rendered but script-driven real-time modifications (that
is, animations) shall be disabled.
•    Live: the artwork has been instantiated, and it is being modified in real time to achieve some
animation effect. In the case of keyframe animation, the artwork shall be live while it is playing
and then shall revert to an instantiated state when playing completes or is stopped.
NOTE 4     The live state is valid only for keyframe animations or in interactive PDF processors that have
ECMAScript support.
If 3D artwork becomes uninstantiated after having been instantiated, later use of the artwork requires
re-instantiation (animations are lost, and the artwork appears in its initial form).
NOTE 5     For this reason, uninstantiation is not necessary unless the artwork has been modified in some
way; consumers can choose to keep unchanged artwork instantiated for performance reasons.
NOTE 6     In non-interactive systems such as printing systems, the artwork cannot be changed. Therefore,
applications can choose to deactivate annotations and uninstantiate artwork differently, based
on factors such as memory usage and the time needed to instantiate artwork, and the TB, NP, D
and DIS entries can be ignored.
Multiple 3D annotations may share an instance of 3D artwork, as described in 13.6.3.3, "3D reference
dictionaries". In such a case, the state of the artwork instance shall be determined in the following way:
•    If any active annotation dictates (through its activation dictionary) that the artwork shall be live,
it shall be live.
•    Otherwise, if any active annotation dictates that the artwork shall be instantiated, it shall be
instantiated.
•    Otherwise (that is, all active annotations dictate that the artwork shall be uninstantiated), the
artwork shall be uninstantiated.
The rules described in 13.6.2, "3D Annotations", apply only to active annotations. If all annotations
referring to the artwork are inactive, the artwork nevertheless may be uninstantiated, instantiated, or
live 3D streams.
The Style and Window entries describe the mechanism that an interactive PDF processor shall use to
present the 3D content in a floating window.
The Transparent entry provides a flag for specifying whether the background of a 3D view shall be
rendered using transparency. If Transparent has the value of true, then some area of the page may be
visible through the background if the resulting alpha value at that location is less than 1.0. See also the
Transparent entry of "Table 310 — Entries in a 3D activation dictionary".
13.6.3          3D streams
13.6.3.1        General
The specification of 3D artwork shall be contained in a 3D stream. 3D stream dictionaries, whose
entries (in addition to the regular stream dictionary's entries; see 7.3.7, "Dictionary objects") are
shown in "Table 311 — Entries in a 3D stream dictionary", may provide a set of predefined views of
the artwork, as well as a default view. They may also provide scripts and resources for providing
customised behaviours or presentations.
648                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 311 — Entries in a 3D stream dictionary
Key              Type           Value
Type             name           (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be 3D for a 3D stream.
Subtype          name           (Required) A name specifying the format of the 3D data contained in the
stream.
The following are the only recognised values:
U3D      which specifies the Universal 3D file format.
PRC      which specifies the PRC file format. (PDF 2.0)
VA               array          (Optional) An array of 3D view dictionaries, each of which specifies a named
preset view of this 3D artwork (see 13.6.4, "3D views").
DV               (various)      (Optional) An object that specifies the default (initial) view of the 3D
artwork. It may be a 3D view dictionary (see 13.6.4, "3D views") or one of
the following types:
•    An integer specifying an index into the VA array.
•    A text string matching the IN entry in one of the views in the VA array.
•    A name that indicates the first (F) or last (L) entries in the VA array.
Default value: 0 (the first entry in the VA array) if VA is present; if VA is not
present, the default view shall be specified within the 3D stream itself.
Resources        name tree (Optional) A name tree that maps name strings to objects that may be used
by applications or scripts to modify the default view of the 3D artwork.
The names in this name tree shall be text strings so as to be encoded in a
way that will be accessible from ECMAScript.
OnInstantiate stream            (Optional) An ECMAScript script that shall be executed when the 3D stream
is instantiated.
AN               dictionary (Optional; PDF 1.7) An animation style dictionary indicating the method that
interactive PDF processors should use to drive keyframe animations
present in this artwork (see 13.6.3.2, "3D animation style dictionaries").
Default value: an animation style dictionary whose Subtype entry has a
value of None.
ColorSpace       name or        (Optional, PDF 2.0) The RGB colour space in which the 3D artwork’s colour
array          values are encoded. Valid values are the name DeviceRGB, an array
specifying a valid CalRGB color space (see 8.6.5.3 "CalRGB colour spaces"),
or an array specifying a valid RGB-based ICCBased color space (see 8.6.5.5
"ICCBased colour spaces"). If this key is not present, the colour space for the
3D artwork colour values are considered undefined and a PDF processor
may choose any appropriate RGB-based colour space, such as sRGB.
The Subtype entry specifies the format of the 3D stream data. PDF processors shall be prepared to
encounter unknown values for Subtype and recover appropriately, which usually means leaving the
annotation in its inactive state, displaying its normal appearance.
NOTE         PDF processors need to follow the approach of falling back to the normal appearance with
regard to entries in other dictionaries that can take different types or values than the ones
specified here.
If present, the VA entry shall be an array containing a list of named present views of the 3D artwork.
Each entry in the array shall be a 3D view dictionary (see 13.6.4, "3D views") that shall contain the
name of the view and the information needed to display the view. The order of array elements
determines the order in which the views shall be presented in a user interface. The DV entry specifies
the view that shall be used as the initial view of the 3D artwork.
Default views shall be determined in the following order of precedence: in the annotation dictionary, in
the 3D stream dictionary, or in the 3D artwork contained in the 3D stream.
3D streams contain information that may be used by interactive PDF processors and by scripts to
perform animations and other programmatically-defined behaviours, such as changing the viewing
orientation or moving individual components of the artwork. If present, the OnInstantiate entry shall
contain an ECMAScript script that shall be executed by applications that support ECMAScript
whenever a 3D stream is read to create an instance of the 3D artwork. The Resources entry shall be a
name tree that contains objects that may be used to modify the initial appearance of the 3D artwork.
13.6.3.2          3D animation style dictionaries
A 3D animation style dictionary (PDF 1.7) specifies the method that interactive PDF processors should
use to apply timeline scaling to keyframe animations. It may also specify that keyframe animations be
played repeatedly. The AN entry of the 3D stream shall specify a 3D animation style dictionary.
A keyframe animation may be provided as the content of a 3D stream dictionary. A keyframe animation
provides key frames and specifies the mapping for the position of geometry over a set period of time
(animation timeline). Keyframe animation is an interactive feature that is highly dependent on the
behaviour and controls provided by the interactive PDF processor.
“Table 312 — Entries in an 3D animation style dictionary” shows the entries in an animation style
dictionary.
Table 312 — Entries in an 3D animation style dictionary
Key        Type        Value
Type       name        (Optional). The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present, shall
be 3DAnimationStyle.
Subtype name           (Optional) The animation style described by this dictionary; see "Table 313 —
Animation styles" for valid values. If an animation style is encountered other
than those described in "Table 313 — Animation styles", an animation style of
None shall be used.
Default value: None
PC         integer     (Optional) An integer specifying the play count for this animation style. A non-
negative integer represents the number of times the animation shall be played. A
negative integer indicates that the animation shall be infinitely repeated. This
value shall be ignored for animation styles of type None.
Default value: 0
650                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type        Value
TM         number      (Optional) A positive number specifying the time multiplier that shall be used
when running the animation. A value greater than one shortens the time it takes
to play the animation, or effectively speeds up the animation.
NOTE       This allows authors to adjust the desired speed of animations, without having
to re-author the 3D artwork.
This value shall be ignored for animation styles of type None. Default value: 1
The descriptions of the animation styles (see "Table 313 — Animation styles") use the following
variables to represent application time or keyframe settings specified in the 3D artwork.
•    t is a point on the animation time line. This value shall be used in conjunction with the keyframe
animation data to determine the state of the 3D artwork.
•    [r0, r1] is the keyframe animation time line.
•    ta is the current time of the interactive PDF processor.
•    t0 is the time when the interactive PDF processor starts the animation.
•    p is the time it takes to play the keyframe animation through one cycle. In the case of the Linear
animation style, one cycle consists of playing the animation through once from beginning to end.
In the case of the Oscillating animation style, one cycle consists of playing the animation from
beginning to end and then from end to beginning.
•    m is the positive multiplier specified by the TM entry in the animation style dictionary.
Table 313 — Animation styles
Style                 Description
None                  Keyframe animations shall not be driven directly by the interactive
PDF processor. This value shall be used by documents that are
intended to drive animations through an alternative means, such as
ECMAScript.
The remaining entries in the animation style dictionary shall be
ignored.
Linear                Keyframe animations shall be driven linearly from beginning to end.
This animation style results in a repetitive playthrough of the
animation, such as in a walking motion.
t = (m(t a − t 0 ) + r0 ) % (r1 − r0 )
p = (r1 − r0 )/m
The "%" symbol indicates the modulus operator.
Oscillating           Keyframe animations shall oscillate along their time range. This
animation style results in a back-and-forth playing of the animation,
such as exploding or collapsing parts.
𝑡 = 0.5(𝑟1 − 𝑟0 )(1 − 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑚(𝑡𝑎 − 𝑡0 ))) + 𝑟0
𝑝 = 2 ∗ 𝑝𝑖/𝑚
13.6.3.3          3D reference dictionaries
More than one 3D annotation may be associated with the same 3D artwork. There are two ways in
which this association may occur, as determined by the annotation’s 3DD entry (see "Table 314 —
Entries in a 3D reference dictionary"):
•    If the 3DD entry specifies a 3D stream, the annotation shall have its own run-time instance of the
3D artwork. Any changes to the artwork shall be reflected only in this annotation. Other
annotations that refer to the same stream shall have separate run-time instances.
•    If the 3DD entry specifies a 3D reference dictionary (whose entries are shown in "Table 314 —
Entries in a 3D reference dictionary"), the annotation shall have a run-time instance of the 3D
artwork with all other annotations that specify the same reference dictionary. Any changes to the
artwork shall be reflected in all such annotations.
Table 314 — Entries in a 3D reference dictionary
Key                Type           Value
Type               name           (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be 3DRef for a 3D reference dictionary.
3DD                stream         (Required) The 3D stream (see 13.6.3, "3D streams") containing
the specification of the 3D artwork.
EXAMPLE          The following example and "Figure 87 — Default view of artwork" through "Figure 89 — Shared artwork
(annotations 2 & 3) modified" show three annotations that use the same 3D artwork. Object 100 (Annotation
1) has its own run-time instance of the 3D stream (object 200); object 101(Annotation 2) and object 102
(Annotation 3) share a run-time instance through the 3D reference dictionary (object 201).
100 0 obj                                        %3D annotation 1
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /3D
/3DD 200 0 R                            %Reference to the 3D stream containing the 3D artwork
>>
endobj
101 0 obj   %3D annotation 2
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /3D
/3DD 201 0 R                            %Reference to a 3D reference dictionary
>>
endobj
102 0 obj                                        %3D annotation 3
<</Type /Annot
/Subtype /3D
/3DD 201 0 R                            %Reference to the same 3D reference dictionary
>>
endobj
200 0 obj                                            %The 3D stream
<</Type /3D
/Subtype /U3D
… other keys related to a stream, such as /Length …
>>
stream
… U3D data …
endstream
endobj
652                                                                                           © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
201 0 obj                                         %3D reference dictionary
<</Type /3DRef
/3DD 200 0 R                             %Reference to the actual 3D artwork.
>>
endobj
Figure 87 — Default view of artwork
Figure 88 — Annotation 2 rotated
Figure 89 — Shared artwork (annotations 2 & 3) modified
"Figure 87 — Default view of artwork" shows the same initial view of the artwork in all three
annotations. "Figure 88 — Annotation 2 rotated" shows the results of rotating the view of the artwork
within Annotation 2. "Figure 89 — Shared artwork (annotations 2 & 3) modified" shows the results of
manipulating the artwork shared by Annotation 2 and Annotation 3: they both reflect the change in the
artwork because they share the same run-time instance. Annotation 1 remains unchanged because it
has its own run-time instance.
NOTE      When multiple annotations refer to the same instance of 3D artwork, the state of the instance is
determined as described in 13.6.2, "3D Annotations"
654                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
13.6.4            3D views
13.6.4.1          General
A 3D view (or simply view) specifies parameters that shall be applied to the virtual camera associated
with a 3D annotation. These parameters may include orientation and position of the camera, details
regarding the projection of camera coordinates into the annotation’s target coordinate system, and a
description of the background on which the artwork shall be drawn. Starting with PDF 1.7, views may
specify how 3D artwork is rendered, coloured, lit, and cross-sectioned, without the use of embedded
ECMAScript. Views may also specify which nodes (three-dimensional areas) of 3D artwork shall be
included in a view and whether those nodes are opaque or invisible.
NOTE 1      Users can manipulate views by performing interactive operations such as free rotation and
translation. In addition, 3D artwork can contain a set of predefined views that the author deems
to be of particular interest. For example, a mechanical drawing of a part can have specific views
showing the top, bottom, left, right, front, and back of an object.
A 3D stream may contain a list of named preset views of the 3D artwork, as specified by the VA entry,
which shall be an array of 3D view dictionaries. The entries in a 3D view dictionary are shown in
"Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view dictionary".
Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view dictionary
Key           Type            Value
Type          name            (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be 3DView for a 3D view dictionary.
XN            text string (Required) The external name of the view, suitable for presentation in a user
interface.
IN            text string (Optional) The internal name of the view, used to refer to the view from other
objects, such as the Go-To-3D-View action (see 12.6.4.16, "Go-To-3D-View
actions"). If omitted, the external name XN shall be used.
MS            name            (Optional) A name specifying how the 3D camera-to-world transformation
matrix shall be determined. The following values are valid:
M       Indicates that the C2W entry shall specify the matrix
U3D     Indicates that the view node selected by the U3DPath entry in the 3D
stream object shall specify the matrix.
NOTE 1 There is no corresponding MS field value for the PRC file format, that would
correspond to a 3D stream object of type PRC. M is the only valid entry for 3D
stream objects of type PRC (or it can be omitted).
If omitted, the view specified in the 3D artwork shall be used.
MA            array           (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of 3D measurement/markup dictionaries, where
each dictionary represents an instance of a 3D measurement to be displayed in
the context of this view. See "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D
measurement/markup dictionary common to all markup subtypes" for the
definition of a 3D measurement dictionary.
C2W           array           (Required if the value of MS is M, ignored otherwise) A 12-element 3D
transformation matrix that specifies a position and orientation of the camera
in world coordinates.
Key         Type        Value
U3DPath     text string (Required if the value of MS is U3D, ignored otherwise) A sequence of one or
or array    more text strings used to access a view node within the 3D artwork. The first
string in the array is a node ID for the root view node, and each subsequent
string is the node ID for a child of the view node specified by the prior string.
Each view node specifies a 3D transformation matrix (see 13.6.5, "Coordinate
systems for 3D"); the concatenation of all the matrices forms the camera-to-
world matrix.
PDF writers should specify only a single text string, not an array, for this entry.
NOTE 2 Do not confuse View Nodes with nodes. A View Node is a parameter in the 3D
artwork that specifies a view; a node is a PDF dictionary that specifies 3D
graphic objects or collections thereof.
CO          number      (Optional; used only if MS is present) A non-negative number indicating a
distance in the camera coordinate system along the z axis to the centre of orbit
for this view; see discussion following "Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view
dictionary". If this entry is not present, the interactive PDF processor shall
determine the centre of orbit.
P           dictionary (Optional) A projection dictionary (see 13.6.4.2, "Projection dictionaries") that
defines the projection of coordinates in the 3D artwork (already transformed
into camera coordinates) onto the target coordinate system of the annotation.
Default value: a projection dictionary where the value of Subtype is
Perspective, the value of FOV is 90, and all other entries take their default
values.
O           stream      (Optional; meaningful only if MS and P are present) A form XObject that shall be
(capital                used to overlay 2D graphics on top of the rendered 3D artwork (see 13.6.6,
letter O)               "3D markup").
BG          dictionary (Optional) A background dictionary that defines the background over which
the 3D artwork shall be drawn (see 13.6.4.3, "3D background dictionaries").
Default value: a background dictionary whose entries take their default values.
RM          dictionary (Optional; PDF 1.7) A render mode dictionary that specifies the render mode to
use when rendering 3D artwork with this view (see 13.6.4.4, "3D render mode
dictionaries"). If omitted, the render mode specified in the 3D artwork shall be
used.
LS          dictionary (Optional; PDF 1.7) A lighting scheme dictionary that specifies the lighting
scheme that shall be used when rendering 3D artwork with this view (see
13.6.4.5, "3D lighting scheme dictionaries"). If omitted, the lighting scheme
specified in the 3D artwork shall be used.
SA          array       (Optional; PDF 1.7) An array that contains cross section dictionaries (see
13.6.4.6, "3D cross section dictionaries"). Each cross section dictionary
provides parameters for applying a cross section to the 3D artwork when
using this view. An empty array signifies that no cross sections shall be
displayed.
656                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key           Type            Value
NA            array           (Optional; PDF 1.7; meaningful only if NR is present) An array that contains 3D
node dictionaries (see 13.6.4.7, "3D node dictionaries"). Each node dictionary
may contain entries that change the node’s state, including its opacity and its
position in world space. This entry and the NR entry specify how the state of
each node shall be changed.
If a node dictionary is present more than once, only the last such dictionary
(using a depth-first traversal) shall be used.
NR            boolean         (Optional; PDF 1.7) Specifies whether nodes specified in the NA array shall be
returned to their original states (as specified in the 3D artwork) before
applying transformation matrices and opacity settings specified in the node
dictionaries. If true, the artwork’s 3D node parameters shall be restored to
their original states and then the dictionaries specified by the NA array shall
be applied. If false, the dictionaries specified by the NA array shall be applied
to the current states of the nodes.
In addition to the parameters specified by a 3D node dictionary, this flag
should also apply to any runtime parameters used by an interactive PDF
processor.
Default value: false
For any view, the PDF writer may provide 2D content specific to the view, to be drawn on top of the 3D
artwork. The O entry specifies a form XObject that shall be overlaid on the rendered 3D artwork. The
coordinate system of the form XObject shall be defined to be the same as the (x, y, 0) plane in the
camera coordinate system (see 13.6.5, "Coordinate systems for 3D").
Use of the O entry is subject to the following restrictions:
•    It can be specified only in 3D view dictionaries in which both a camera-to-world matrix (MS and
associated entries) and a projection dictionary (the P entry) are present.
•    The form XObject is required to be associated with a specific view (not with the camera position
defined by the 3D view dictionary). The interactive PDF processor shall draw it only when the
user navigates using the 3D view, and shall not draw it when the user happens to navigate to the
same orientation by manual means.
•    The interactive PDF processor shall draw it only if the user has not invoked any actions that alter
the artwork-to-world matrix.
NOTE 2      Failure to abide by these restrictions could result in misalignment of the overlay with the
rendered 3D graphics.
The CO entry specifies the distance from the camera to the centre of orbit for the 3D view, which is the
point around which the camera shall rotate when performing an orbit-style navigation. "Figure 90 —
Rotation around the centre of orbit" illustrates camera positioning when orbiting around the centre of
orbit.
Figure 90 — Rotation around the centre of orbit
NOTE 3     The LS entry allows the lighting of the 3D artwork to be changed without changing the artwork
itself. This enables consumers to view a given piece of 3D artwork with a variety of lighting
options without requiring multiple copies of the 3D artwork stream that differ only in lighting. It
also enables artwork with poor lighting to be corrected in cases where the original content
cannot be re-authored. See 13.6.4.5, "3D lighting scheme dictionaries"
The SA entry provides cross section information for clipping 3D artwork while its associated
view is active. This allows view authors to be more clear in calling out the intended areas of
interest for a particular view, some of which might otherwise be completely obscured. See
13.6.4.6, "3D cross section dictionaries"
The NR and NA entries are meant to give a more accurate representation of the 3D artwork at a
given state. These keys give view authors finer granularity in manipulating the artwork to be
presented in a particular way. They also provide a means for returning node parameters to a
known state after potential changes by interactive features such as keyframe animations and
ECMAScript. See 13.6.4.7, "3D node dictionaries"
13.6.4.2        Projection dictionaries
A projection dictionary (see "Table 316 — Entries in a projection dictionary") defines the mapping of
3D camera coordinates onto the target coordinate system of the annotation. Each 3D view may specify
a projection dictionary by means of its P entry.
NOTE       Although view nodes can specify projection information, PDF consumers ignore it in favour of
information in the projection dictionary.
658                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
PDF 1.6 introduces near/far clipping. This type of clipping defines a near plane and a far plane (as
shown in "Figure 91 — Perspective projection of 3D artwork onto the near plane"). Objects, or parts of
objects, that are beyond the far plane or closer to the camera than the near plane are not drawn. 3D
objects shall be projected onto the near plane and then scaled and positioned within the annotation’s
target coordinate system, as described in "Table 316 — Entries in a projection dictionary".
Table 316 — Entries in a projection dictionary
Key           Type           Value
Subtype       name           (Required) The type of projection. Valid values shall be O (orthographic) or P
(perspective).
CS            name           (Optional) The clipping style. Valid values shall be XNF (explicit near/far) or
ANF (automatic near/far). Default value: ANF.
F             number         (Optional; meaningful only if the value of CS is XNF) The far clipping distance,
expressed in the camera coordinate system. No parts of objects whose z
coordinates are greater than the value of this entry are drawn. If this entry is
absent, no far clipping occurs.
N             number         (Required if Subtype is P; meaningful only if the value of CS is XNF) The near
clipping distance, expressed in the camera coordinate system. No parts of
objects whose z coordinates are less than the value of this entry are drawn. If
Subtype is P, the value shall be positive; if Subtype is O, the value shall be
non-negative, and the default value is 0.
FOV           number         (Required if Subtype is P, ignored otherwise) A number between 0 and 180,
inclusive, specifying the field of view of the virtual camera, in degrees. It
defines a cone in 3D space centred around the z axis and a circle where the
cone intersects the near clipping plane. The circle, along with the value of PS,
specify the scaling of the projected artwork when rendered in the 2D plane of
the annotation.
PS            number         (Optional; meaningful only if Subtype is P) An object that specifies the scaling
or name        used when projecting the 3D artwork onto the annotation’s target coordinate
system. It defines the diameter of the circle formed by the intersection of the
near plane and the cone specified by FOV. The value may be one of the
following:
•   A positive number that explicitly specifies the diameter as a distance in the
annotation’s target coordinate system.
•   A name specifying that the diameter shall be set to the width (W), height (H),
minimum of width and height (Min), or maximum of width and height (Max) of
the annotation’s 3D view box.
Default value: W.
OS            number         (Optional; meaningful only if Subtype is O) A positive number that specifies
the scale factor to be applied to both the x and y coordinates when projecting
onto the annotation’s target coordinate system (the z coordinate is
discarded). Default value: 1.
Key        Type       Value
OB         name       (Optional; PDF 1.7; meaningful only if Subtype is O) A name that specifies a
strategy for binding (scaling to fit) the near plane’s x and y coordinates onto
the annotation’s target coordinate system. The scaling specified in this entry
shall be applied in addition to the scaling factor specified by the OS entry. The
value may be one of the following:
W             Scale to fit the width of the annotation
H             Scale to fit the height of the annotation
Min           Scale to fit the lesser of width or height of the annotation
Max           Scale to fit the greater of width or height of the annotation
Absolute      No scaling should occur due to binding.
Default value: Absolute.
The CS entry defines how the near and far planes are determined. A value of XNF means that the N and
F entries explicitly specify the z coordinate of the near and far planes, respectively. A value of ANF for
CS means that the near and far planes shall be determined automatically based on the objects in the
artwork.
The Subtype entry specifies the type of projection, which determines how objects are projected onto
the near plane and scaled. The allowed values are O for orthographic projection and P for perspective
projection.
For orthographic projection, objects shall be projected onto the near plane by simply discarding their z
value. They shall be scaled from units of the near plane’s coordinate system to those of the annotation’s
target coordinate system by the combined factors specified by the OS entry and the OB entry.
For perspective projection, a given coordinate (x, y, z) shall be projected onto the near plane, defining a
2D coordinate (x1, y1) using the following formulas:
𝑛
𝑥1 = 𝑥 ×
𝑧
𝑛
𝑦1 = 𝑦 ×
𝑧
where n is the z coordinate of the near plane.
Scaling with perspective projection is more complicated than for orthographic projection. The FOV
entry specifies an angle that defines a cone centred along the z axis in the camera coordinate system
(see "Figure 91 — Perspective projection of 3D artwork onto the near plane"). The cone intersects with
the near plane, forming a circular area on the near plane. "Figure 92 — Objects projected onto the near
clipping plane, as seen from the position of the camera" shows this circle and graphics from the
position of the camera.
660                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Figure 91 — Perspective projection of 3D artwork onto the near plane
Figure 92 — Objects projected onto the near clipping plane, as seen from the position of the
camera
The PS entry specifies the diameter that this circle will have when the graphics projected onto the near
plane are rendered in the annotation’s 3D view box (see "Figure 93 — Positioning and scaling the near
plane onto the annotation’s 3D view box"). Although the diameter of the circle determines the scaling
factor, graphics outside the circle shall also be displayed, providing they fit within the view box, as seen
in the figure.
"Figure 94 — 3D annotation positioned on the page" shows the entire 3D annotation. In this case, the
3D view box is smaller than the annotation’s rectangle, which also contains 2D content outside the 3D
view box.
Figure 93 — Positioning and scaling the near plane onto the annotation’s 3D view box
Figure 94 — 3D annotation positioned on the page
13.6.4.3       3D background dictionaries
A 3D background dictionary defines the background over which a 3D view shall be drawn. "Table 317
— Entries in a 3D background dictionary" shows the entries in a background dictionary. Currently,
only a single opaque colour is supported, where the colour shall be defined in the DeviceRGB colour
space. 3D artwork may include transparent objects; however, there is no interaction between such
objects and objects drawn below the annotation. In effect, the 3D artwork and its background form a
transparency group whose flattened results have an opacity of 1 (see 11, "Transparency").
662                                                                                   © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
NOTE          An annotation’s normal appearance needs to have the same behaviour with respect to
transparency when the appearance is intended to depict the 3D artwork. This does not apply
when the appearance is used for another purpose, such as a compatibility warning message.
Table 317 — Entries in a 3D background dictionary
Key           Type          Value
Type          name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be 3DBG for a 3D background dictionary.
Subtype       name          (Optional) The type of background. The only valid value shall be SC
(solid colour), which indicates a single opaque colour. Default value: SC.
CS            name or       (Optional) The colour space of the background. The only valid value
array         shall be the name DeviceRGB. Default value: DeviceRGB.
PDF consumers shall be prepared to encounter other values that may be
supported in future versions of PDF.
C             (various)     (Optional) The colour of the background, in the colour space defined by
CS. Default value: an array [1 1 1] representing the colour white when
the value of CS is DeviceRGB.
EA            boolean       (Optional) If true, the background shall apply to the entire annotation; if
false, the background shall apply only to the rectangle specified by the
annotation’s 3D view box (the 3DB entry in "Table 309 — Additional
entries specific to a 3D annotation"). Default value: false.
13.6.4.4           3D render mode dictionaries
A 3D render mode dictionary (PDF 1.7) specifies the style in which the 3D artwork shall be rendered.
NOTE 1        Surfaces can be filled with opaque colours, they can be stroked as a "wireframe", or the artwork
can be rendered with special lighting effects.
NOTE 2        A render mode dictionary enables document authors to customise the rendered appearance of
3D artwork to suit the needs of the intended consumer, without reauthoring the artwork. For
interactive PDF processors concerned strictly with geometry, complex artwork rendered using
the Wireframe or Points style can have much better performance without the added overhead
of texturing and lighting effects. Artwork in a document intended for print can have a much more
integrated feel when using the Illustration render mode style.
The RM entry in the 3D views dictionary may specify a 3D render mode dictionary. "Table 318 —
Entries in a render mode dictionary" shows the entries in a render mode dictionary.
Table 318 — Entries in a render mode dictionary
Key         Type      Value
Type        name      (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be 3DRenderMode.
Subtype     name      (Required) The type of render mode described by this dictionary; see "Table
319 — Render modes" for specific values. If an unrecognised value is
encountered, then this render mode dictionary shall be ignored.
Key        Type     Value
AC         array    (Optional) An array that specifies the auxiliary colour that shall be used when
rendering the 3D image. The first entry in the array shall be a colour space;
the subsequent entries shall be values specifying colour values in that colour
space. The interpretation of this entry depends on the render mode specified
by the Subtype entry, but it is often used to specify a colour for drawing
points or edges.
The only valid colour space shall be DeviceRGB. If a colour space other than
DeviceRGB is specified, this entry shall be ignored and the default value shall
be used.
Default value: [/DeviceRGB 0 0 0] representing the colour black.
FC         name     (Optional) A name or array that specifies the face colour that shall be used
or       when rendering the 3D image. This entry shall be relevant only when
array    Subtype has a value of Illustration.
If the value of FC is an array, the first entry in the array shall be a colour space
and the subsequent entries shall be values specifying values in that colour
space. The only valid colour space is DeviceRGB. Any colour space other than
DeviceRGB shall be ignored and the default value shall be used.
If the value of FC is a name, it shall describe a colour. The only valid name
value shall be BG, specifying the current background colour in use for
displaying the artwork. If a name other than BG is encountered, this entry
shall be ignored and the background colour for the host annotation shall be
used (see "Table 192 — Entries in an appearance characteristics dictionary").
Default value: BG
O          number (Optional) A number specifying the opacity of the added transparency applied
by some render modes, using a standard additive blend.
Default value: 0.5
CV         number (Optional) A number specifying the angle, in degrees, that shall be used as the
crease value when determining silhouette edges. If two front-facing faces
share an edge and the angle between the normals of those faces is greater
than or equal to the crease value, then that shared edge shall be considered a
silhouette edge.
Default value: 45
For render modes that add a level of transparency to the rendering, the O entry specifies the additional
opacity that shall be used. All such transparency effects use a standard additive blend mode.
The CV entry sets the crease value that shall be used when determining silhouette edges, which may be
used to adjust the appearance of illustrated render modes. An edge shared by two faces is a silhouette
edge if either of the following conditions is met:
•    One face is front-facing and the other is back-facing.
•    The angle between the two faces is greater than or equal to the crease value.
"Table 319 — Render modes" describes the render modes that may be specified in a render mode
dictionary.
664                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 319 — Render modes
Mode                                      Description
Solid                                     Displays textured and lit geometric shapes. The AC entry shall
be ignored.
SolidWireframe                            Displays textured and lit geometric shapes with single colour
edges on top of them. The colour of these edges shall be
determined by the AC entry.
Transparent                               Displays textured and lit geometric shapes with an added level
of transparency. The AC entry shall be ignored.
TransparentWireframe                      Displays textured and lit geometric shapes with an added level
of transparency, with single colour opaque edges on top of it.
The colour of these edges shall be determined by the AC entry.
BoundingBox                               Displays the bounding box edges of each node, aligned with
the axes of the local coordinate space for that node. The colour
of the bounding box edges shall be determined by the AC
entry.
TransparentBoundingBox                    Displays bounding boxes faces of each node, aligned with the
axes of the local coordinate space for that node, with an added
level of transparency. The colour of the bounding box faces
shall be determined by the FC entry.
TransparentBoundingBoxOutline Displays bounding boxes edges and faces of each node, aligned
with the axes of the local coordinate space for that node, with
an added level of transparency. The colour of the bounding
box edges shall be determined by the AC entry. The colour of
the bounding boxes faces shall be determined by the FC entry.
Wireframe                                 Displays only edges in a single colour. The colour of these
edges shall be determined by the AC entry.
ShadedWireframe                           Displays only edges, though interpolates their colour between
their two vertices and applies lighting. The AC entry shall be
ignored.
HiddenWireframe                           Displays edges in a single colour, though removes back-facing
and obscured edges. The colour of these edges shall be
determined by the AC entry.
Vertices                                  Displays only vertices in a single colour. The colour of these
points shall be determined by the AC entry.
ShadedVertices                            Displays only vertices, though uses their vertex colour and
applies lighting. The AC entry shall be ignored.
Illustration                              Displays silhouette edges with surfaces, removes obscured
lines. The colour of these edges shall be determined by the AC
entry, and the colour of the surfaces shall be determined by
the FC entry.
Mode                                 Description
SolidOutline                         Displays silhouette edges with lit and textured surfaces,
removes obscured lines. The colour of these edges shall be
determined by the AC entry.
ShadedIllustration                   Displays silhouette edges with lit and textured surfaces and an
additional emissive term to remove poorly lit areas of the
artwork. The colour of these edges shall be determined by the
AC entry.
If a render mode type is encountered other than those described in "Table 319 — Render modes", the
render mode dictionary containing that entry shall be ignored by its consumers. This allows future
documents using new render modes to behave consistently with future documents using new 3D view
constructs that are ignored by older viewers.
13.6.4.5         3D lighting scheme dictionaries
A 3D lighting scheme dictionary (PDF 1.7) specifies the lighting to apply to 3D artwork. The LS entry in
the 3D view may include a 3D lighting scheme dictionary.
"Table 320 — Entries in a 3D lighting scheme dictionary" shows the entries in a 3D lighting scheme
dictionary.
Table 320 — Entries in a 3D lighting scheme dictionary
Key                       Type          Value
Type                      name          (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary
describes; if present, shall be 3DLightingScheme.
Subtype                   name          (Required) The style of lighting scheme described by this
dictionary (see "Table 321 — 3D lighting scheme styles").
"Table 321 — 3D lighting scheme styles" describes the supported lighting schemes. With the exception
of the Artwork lighting style, all the lights specified in "Table 321 — 3D lighting scheme styles" are
infinite lights (also known as distant lights). Unlike lights from a point source, all rays from an infinite
light source are emitted along a single direction vector. For lights specifying an ambient term, this term
shall be added to the diffuse colour of an object’s material. All colours shall be specified in the
DeviceRGB colour space.
When a style other than Artwork is used, only those lights described shall be present; any lighting
described in the artwork shall not be used.
Table 321 — 3D lighting scheme styles
Scheme         Description
Artwork        Lights as specified in the 3D artwork. This has the same effect as if the 3D lighting
scheme dictionary were omitted.
666                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Scheme           Description
None             No lights shall be used. That is, lighting specified in the 3D artwork shall be
ignored.
White            Three blue-gray infinite lights, no ambient term
Light 1        Colour: <0.38, 0.38, 0.45>         Direction: <-2.0, -1.5, -0.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.6, 0.6, 0.67>           Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 3        Colour: <0.5, 0.5, 0.57>           Direction: <-0.5, 0.0, 2.0>
Day              Three light-gray infinite lights, no ambient term
Light 1        Colour: <0.5, 0.5, 0.5>            Direction: <-2.0, -1.5, -.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.8, 0.8, 0.9>            Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 3        Colour: <0.9, 0.9, 0.9>            Direction: <0.02, 0.01, 2.0>
Night            One yellow, one aqua, and one blue infinite light, no ambient term
Light 1        Colour: <1, .75, .39>              Direction: <-2.0, -1.5, -0.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.31, 0.47, 0.55>         Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 3        Colour: <.5, .5, 1.0>              Direction: <0.0, 0.0, 2.0>
Hard             Three gray infinite lights, moderate ambient term
Light          Colour: <0.5, 0.5, 0.5>            Direction: <-1.5, -1.5, -1.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.8, 0.8, 0.9>            Direction: <1.5, 1.5, -1.5>
Light 3        Colour: <0.9, 0.9, 0.9>            Direction: <-0.5, 0, 2.0>
Ambient        Colour: <0.5, 0.5, 0.5>
Primary          One red, one green, and one blue infinite light, no ambient term
Light 1        Colour: <1, 0.2, 0.5>              Direction: <-2, -1.5, -0.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.2, 1.0, 0.5>            Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 3        Colour: <0, 0, 1>                  Direction: <0.0, 0.0, 2.0>
Blue             Three blue infinite lights, no ambient term
Light 1        Colour: <0.4, 0.4, 0.7>            Direction: <-2.0, -1.5, -0.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.75, 0.75, 0.95>         Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 3        Colour: <0.7, 0.7, 0.95>           Direction: <0.0, 0.0, 2.0>
Red              Three red infinite lights, no ambient term
Light 1        Colour: <0.8, 0.3, 0.4>            Direction: <-2.0, -1.5, -0.5>
Light 2        Colour: <0.95, 0.5, 0.7>           Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 3        Colour: <0.95, 0.4, 0.5>           Direction: <0.0, 0.0, 2.0>
Scheme         Description
Cube           Six gray infinite lights aligned with the major axes, no ambient term
Light 1       Colour: <.4, .4, .4>    Direction: <1.0, 0.01, 0.01>
Light 2       Colour: <.4, .4, .4>    Direction: <0.01, 1.0, 0.01>
Light 3       Colour: <.4, .4, .4>    Direction: <0.01, 0.01, 1.0>
Light 4       Colour: <.4, .4, .4>    Direction: <-1.0, 0.01, 0.01>
Light 5       Colour: <.4, .4, .4>    Direction: <0.01, -1.0, 0.01>
Light 6       Colour: <.4, .4, .4>    Direction: <0.01, 0.01, -1.0>
CAD            Three gray infinite lights and one light attached to the camera, no ambient term
Light 1       Colour: <0.72, 0.72, 0.81>        Direction: <0.0, 0.0, 0.0>
Light 2       Colour: <0.2, 0.2, 0.2>           Direction: <-2.0, -1.5, -0.5>
Light 3       Colour: <0.32, 0.32, 0.32>        Direction: <2.0, 1.1, -2.5>
Light 4       Colour: <0.36, 0.36, 0.36>        Direction: <0.04, 0.01, 2.0>
Headlamp       Single infinite light attached to the camera, low ambient term
Light 1       Colour: <0.8, 0.8, 0.9>           Direction: <0.0, 0.0, 0.0>
Ambient       Colour: <0.1, 0.1, 0.1>
If a lighting scheme style is encountered other than those described in "Table 321 — 3D lighting
scheme styles" the lighting scheme dictionary containing that entry shall be ignored.
NOTE        This allows future documents using new lighting schemes to behave consistently with future
documents using new 3D view constructs. That is, the expected behaviour is for the interactive
PDF processor to ignore unrecognised lighting styles and 3D view constructs.
13.6.4.6         3D cross section dictionaries
A 3D cross section dictionary (PDF 1.7) specifies how a portion of the 3D artwork shall be clipped for
the purpose of showing artwork cross sections. The SA entry of a 3D view may specify multiple 3D
cross section dictionaries.
NOTE        Cross sections enable interactive PDF processors to display otherwise hidden parts of the
artwork. They also allow users to comment on cross sections, using markup annotations. For
example, markup annotations can be used to apply markup annotations to a cross section or to
measure distances in a cross section. If multiple cross sections are specified for a view, the
markup annotations in the view apply to all cross sections in the view.
"Table 322 — Entries in a 3D cross section dictionary" shows the entries in a 3D cross section
dictionary.
Table 322 — Entries in a 3D cross section dictionary
Key   Type     Value
Type name      (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present, shall be
3DCrossSection for a 3D cross section dictionary.
668                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key     Type       Value
C       array      (Optional) A three element array specifying the centre of rotation on the cutting plane
in world space coordinates (see 13.6.5, "Coordinate systems for 3D").
Default value: [0 0 0] specifying a cutting plane rotating about the origin of the world
space.
O       array      (Required) A three-element array specifying the orientation of the cutting plane in
world space, where each value represents the orientation in relation to the X, Y, and Z
axes, respectively (see 13.6.5, "Coordinate systems for 3D"). Exactly one of the values
shall be null, indicating an initial state of the cutting plane that is perpendicular to the
corresponding axis and clipping all geometry on the positive side of that axis. The
other two values shall be numbers indicating the rotation of the plane, in degrees,
around their corresponding axes. The order in which these rotations are applied shall
match the order in which the values appear in the array.
Default value: [null 0 0] specifying a cutting plane that is perpendicular to the X axis
and coplanar with the Y and Z axes.
PO      number (Optional) A number in the range [0, 1] indicating the opacity of the cutting plane
using a standard additive blend mode.
Default value: 0.5
PC      array      (Optional) An array that specifies the colour for the cutting plane. The first entry in
the array is a colour space, and the remaining entries are values in that colour space.
The only valid colour space is DeviceRGB. If a colour space other than DeviceRGB is
specified, this entry shall be ignored and the default value shall be used.
Default value: [/DeviceRGB 1 1 1] representing the colour white.
IV      boolean (Optional) A flag indicating the visibility of the intersection of the cutting plane with
any 3D geometry. If true, then the intersection shall be visible. If false, then the
intersection shall not be visible.
Default value: false
IC      array      (Optional; meaningful only if IV is true) An array that specifies the colour for the
cutting plane’s intersection with the 3D artwork. The first entry in the array is a
colour space, and the remaining entries are values in that colour space. The only valid
colour space is DeviceRGB. If a colour space other than DeviceRGB is specified, this
entry shall be ignored and the default value shall be used.
Default value: [/DeviceRGB 0 1 0] representing the colour green.
ST      boolean (Optional; PDF 2.0) Show Transparent. A flag indicating that the portion of a model on
the cut side of a section plane shall be viewed using a transparent render mode. If
true, the clipped portion of the model shall be drawn as transparent regardless of the
render mode of the non-cut portion of the model. The recommend appearance uses
graphical settings identical or similar to those used by the existing Transparent
3DRenderMode in "Table 319 — Render modes" already supported by the 13.6.4.4,
"3D render mode dictionaries". If false, the clipped portion of the model shall not be
drawn. Default value: false.
SC      boolean (Optional; PDF 2.0) Section Capping. A flag indicating whether 3D Nodes and the
section plane shall be analysed and rendered as if cutting through a solid object. If
true, an algorithm is applied with the result that additional temporary geometry may
be created to represent a section cap. The section cap shall be visible within the area
enclosed by the intersection of the 3D Node 3D geometry with the section plane. If the
flag is false, no additional temporary geometry shall be created to represent a section
cap. Default value: false.
The C entry specifies the centre of the cutting plane. This implies that the plane passes through the
centre point, but it is also the point of reference when determining the orientation of the plane.
The O array indicates the orientation of the cutting plane, taking into account its centre. The
orientation may be determined by a two-step process:
a) The plane shall be situated such that it passes through point C, and oriented such that it is
perpendicular to the axis specified by the array entry whose value is null.
b) For each of the other two axes, the plane shall be rotated the specified number of degrees around
the associated axis, while maintaining C as a fixed point on the plane. Since the two axes are
perpendicular, the order in which the rotations are performed is irrelevant.
The PO entry specifies the opacity of the plane itself when rendered, while the PC entry provides its
colour. When the PO entry is greater than 0, a visual representation of the cutting plane shall be
rendered with the 3D artwork. This representation is a square with a side length equal to the length of
the diagonal of the maximum bounding box for the 3D artwork, taking into account any keyframe
animations present. When the PO entry is 0, no visible representation of the cutting plane shall be
rendered.
The IV entry shall be a boolean value that determines whether a visual indication shall be drawn of the
plane’s intersection with the 3D artwork. If such an indication is drawn, the IC entry shall specify its
colour.
EXAMPLE          The following example describes a set of views and corresponding cross sections that illustrate the various
effects of orientation.
3 0 obj                                                             %CrossSection1
<<
/Type /3DCrossSection
/C [0 0 0]
/O [null 0 0]
/PO 0.35
/PC [/DeviceRGB 0.75 0.86 1]
/IV true
/IC [/DeviceRGB 0 1 0]
>>
endobj
4 0 obj                                                             %CrossSection2
<<
/Type /3DCrossSection
/C [0 0 0]
/O [null -30 0]
/PO 0.35
/PC [/DeviceRGB 0.75 0.86 1]
/IV true
/IC [/DeviceRGB 0 1 0]
>>
endobj
5 0 obj                                                             %CrossSection3
<<
/Type /3DCrossSection
/C [0 0 0]
/O [null 0 30]
/PO 0.35
/PC [/DeviceRGB 0.75 0.86 1]
670                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
/IV true
/IC [/DeviceRGB 0 1 0]
>>
endobj
6 0 obj                                                              %CrossSection4
<<
/Type /3DCrossSection
/C [0 0 0]
/O [null -30 30]
/PO 0.35
/PC [/DeviceRGB 0.75 0.86 1]
/IV true
/IC [/DeviceRGB 0 1 0]
>>
endobj
7 0 obj                                                              %View0
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (NoCrossSection)
/SA []
…
>>
endobj
8 0 obj                                                              %View1
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (CrossSection1)
/SA [3 0 R]
…
>>
endobj
9 0 obj                                                              %View2
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (CrossSection2)
/SA [4 0 R]
…
>>
endobj
10 0 obj                                                             %View3
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (CrossSection3)
/SA [5 0 R]
…
>>
endobj
11 0 obj                                                             %View4
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (CrossSection4)
/SA [6 0 R]
…
>>
endobj
The following illustrations show the views described in the previous example, some of which include
cross sections.
Figure 95 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View0 (no cross section)
"Figure 95 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View0 (no cross section)" through "Figure 99 —
Rendering of the 3D artwork using View4" use world coordinates whose origin is the centre of the
cube. The axes illustrated in each diagram show the relative orientation of the world coordinate axes,
not the actual position of those axes. These axes are not part of the 3D artwork used in this example.
Figure 96 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (cross section perpendicular to the x
axis)
"Figure 96 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (cross section perpendicular to the x axis)"
shows the cross section specified for the 3DView that references CrossSection1. The illustration shows
the edges of the cutting plane ending at the edges of the annotation’s rectangle. This cross section
specifies a plane with the following characteristics:
•     Includes the world art origin: /C [0 0 0]
•     Perpendicular to the X axis and parallel to the Y and Z axes: /O [null 0 0]
•     Opacity of the cutting plane is 35%: /PO 0.35
•     Colour of the cutting plane is light blue: /PC [/DeviceRGB 0.75 0.86 1]
•     Intersection of the cutting plane with the object is visible: /IV true
•     Colour of the intersection of the cutting plane and the object is green:
/IC [/DeviceRGB 0 1 0]
672                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Figure 97 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View2 (cross section rotated around the y axis
by -30 degrees)
"Figure 97 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View2 (cross section rotated around the y axis
by -30 degrees)" shows the cross section specified for the 3DView that references CrossSection2. This
cross section specifies a plane that differs from the one specified in CrossSection1 ("Figure 96 —
Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (cross section perpendicular to the x axis)") in the following
way:
•    Perpendicular to the X axis, rotated -30 degrees around the Y axis, and parallel to the Z axis: /O
[null -30 0]
Figure 98 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View3 (cross section rotated around the z axis
by 30 degrees)
"Figure 98 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View3 (cross section rotated around the z axis
by 30 degrees)" shows the cross section specified for the 3DView that references CrossSection3. This
cross section specifies a plane that differs from the one specified in CrossSection1 ("Figure 96 —
Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (cross section perpendicular to the x axis)") in the following
way:
•    Perpendicular to the X axis, parallel to the Y axis, and rotated 30 degrees around the Z axis: /O
[null 0 30]
Figure 99 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View4
(cross section rotated around the y axis by -30 degrees and around the z axis by 30 degrees)
"Figure 99 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View4" shows the cross section specified for the
3DView that references CrossSection4. This cross section specifies a plane that differs from the one
specified in CrossSection1 ("Figure 96 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (cross section
perpendicular to the x axis)") in the following way:
•    Perpendicular to the X axis, rotated -30 degrees around the Y axis, and rotated 30 degrees around
the Z axis: /O [null -30 30]
13.6.4.7        3D node dictionaries
A 3D view may specify a 3D node dictionary (PDF 1.7), which specifies particular areas of 3D artwork
and the opacity and visibility with which individual nodes shall be displayed. The 3D artwork shall be
contained in the parent 3D stream object. The NA entry of the 3D views dictionary may specify
multiple 3D node dictionaries for a particular view.
NOTE 1     While many PDF dictionaries reference 3D artwork in its entirety, it is often useful to reference
3D artwork at a more granular level. This enables properties such as visibility, opacity, and
orientation to be applied to subsets of the 3D artwork. These controls enable underlying nodes
to be revealed, by making the overlying nodes transparent or by moving them out of the way.
NOTE 2     Do not confuse nodes with view nodes. A node is a PDF dictionary that specifies an area in 3D
artwork, while a view node is a parameter in the 3D artwork that specifies a view.
"Table 323 — Entries in a 3D node dictionary" shows the entries in a 3D node dictionary.
Table 323 — Entries in a 3D node dictionary                        Goto errata
Key      Type        Value
Type     name        (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be 3DNode for a 3D node dictionary.
674                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key         Type          Value
N           text string (Required) The name of the node being described by the node dictionary.
All names in the node dictionary shall be unique. Interpretation of this
entry shall depend upon the 3D format specified in the Subtype entry in
"Table 311 — Entries in a 3D stream dictionary" as described below:
U3D              If the Subtype of the corresponding 3D Stream is U3D,
this entry shall correspond to the field Node block
name, specified in the Universal 3D file format.
PRC              (PDF 2.0) If the Subtype of the corresponding 3D
Stream is PRC, this entry shall be the Unique Identifier
(UUID) as specified in ISO 14739-1.
NOTE 1 When comparing this entry to node names for a particular convention
(such as Universal 3D or PRC), interactive PDF processors will need to
translate between the PDF text encoding used by PDF and the
character encoding specified in the 3D stream.
NOTE 2 The description of the value of the N key was clarified in this
document (2020).
O           number        (Optional) A number in the range [0, 1] indicating the opacity of the
geometry supplied by this node using a standard additive blend mode.
If this entry is absent, the viewer shall use the opacity specified for the
parent node or for the 3D artwork (in ascending order).
V           boolean       (Optional) A flag indicating the visibility of this node. If true, then the
node is visible. If false, then the node shall not be visible.
If this entry is absent, the viewer shall use the visibility specified for the
parent node or for the 3D artwork (in ascending order).
M           array         (Optional) A 12-element 3D transformation matrix that specifies the
position and orientation of this node, relative to its parent, in world
coordinates (see 13.6.5, "Coordinate systems for 3D").
Instance dictionary (Required if data are present; PDF 2.0) An indirect object reference to a
RichMediaInstance dictionary (see "Table 343 — Entries in a
RichMediaInstance dictionary") that is also referenced by an entry in the
Instances array.
Data        text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) A text string or stream that contains state data to be
or stream passed to the instance when the view is triggered.
See the extended description of the Data key in "Table 345 — Entries in
a View Params dictionary".
RM          dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A render mode dictionary that shall specify the
render mode and related properties for this node. If omitted, the render
mode specified in the 3D view is used, and if that is not present, the
render mode of the 3D artwork is used.
The render mode dictionary shall be identical to that used by the 3D
view dictionary. See "Table 318 — Entries in a render mode dictionary".
Goto errata
The N entry specifies which node in the 3D stream corresponds to this node dictionary.
The O entry describes the opacity that shall be used when rendering this node, and the V entry shall
determine whether or not the node is rendered at all. While a node with an opacity of 0 shall be
rendered in the same way as a non-visible node, having a separate value for the visibility of a node
allows interactive PDF processors to show/hide partially transparent nodes, without overwriting the
intended opacity of those nodes.
The M entry specifies the node’s matrix relative to its parent, in world coordinates. If an hierarchy of
nodes is intended to be repositioned while still maintaining its internal structure, then only the node at
the root of the hierarchy needs to be adjusted.
The Instance and Data entries provide a reference to an instance array dictionary within the
Instances array. The content of Data shall be passed to and from the appropriate media run time
engine by the interactive PDF processor in a rich media context.
The RM provides the facility of specifying a change in render mode for each node. In PDF 1.7, render
mode could be specified globally or per view. See 13.6.4, "3D views".
The RM entry to the 3D node dictionary is applicable both for the 3D node structure within a rich
media context (see 13.7.2, "RichMedia annotations") and within the existing 3D annotations structure
(see 13.6.2, "3D Annotations"). The Instances array and additional Data entries are applicable only to
3D nodes within a rich media context.
EXAMPLE        The following example shows a 3D view specifying an array of node parameters.
3 0 obj                               %Default node params with all shapes visible and opaque
[<</Type /3DNode
/N (Sphere)
/O 1
/V true
/M […]>>
<</Type /3DNode
/N (Cone)
/O 1
/V true>>
<</Type /3DNode
/N (Cube)
/O 1
/V true>>
]
4 0 obj                               %Params with the cone hidden and the sphere semi-transparent
[<</Type /3DNode
/N (Sphere)
/O 0.5
/V true>>
<</Type /3DNode
/N (Cone)
/O 1
/V false>>
<</Type /3DNode
/N (Cube)
/O 1
/V true>>
]
endobj
5 0 obj                               %View1, using the default set of node params
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (View1)
/NA 3 0 R
…
676                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
>>
endobj
6 0 obj                                   %View2, using the alternative set of node params
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (View2)
/NA 4 0 R
…
>>
endobj
Figure 100 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (all shapes visible and opaque)
"Figure 100 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (all shapes visible and opaque)" shows a view
whose node array includes three nodes, all of which shall be rendered with the appearance opaque (/O
1) and visible (/V true).
Figure 101 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View2 (the cone is hidden and the sphere is
semi-transparent)
"Figure 101 — Rendering of the 3D artwork using View2 (the cone is hidden and the sphere is semi-
transparent)" shows a view with a node array that specifies the same three nodes used in "Figure 100
— Rendering of the 3D artwork using View1 (all shapes visible and opaque)". These nodes have the
following display characteristics:
•    The node named Sphere is partially transparent (/O 0.5) and visible (/V true)
•    The node named Cone is opaque (/O 1) and invisible (/V false)
•    The node named Cube is opaque (/O 1) and visible (/V true)
13.6.5            Coordinate systems for 3D
3D artwork is a collection of objects whose positions and geometry shall be specified using three-
dimensional coordinates. 8.3, "Coordinate systems" discusses the concepts of two-dimensional
coordinate systems, their geometry and transformations. This subclause extends those concepts to
include the third dimension.
As described in 8.3, "Coordinate systems" positions shall be defined in terms of pairs of x and y
coordinates on the Cartesian plane. The origin of the plane specifies the location (0, 0); x values
increase to the right and y values increase upward. For three-dimensional graphics, a third axis, the z
axis, shall be used. The origin shall be at (0, 0, 0); positive z values increase going into the page.
In two-dimensional graphics, the transformation matrix transforms the position, size, and orientation
of objects in a plane. It is a 3-by-3 matrix, where only six of the elements may be changed; therefore,
the matrix shall be expressed in PDF as an array of six numbers:
𝑎 𝑏 0
[ 𝑐 𝑑 0] = [𝑎 𝑏 𝑐 𝑑 𝑡𝑥 𝑡𝑦]
𝑡𝑥 𝑡𝑦 1
In 3D graphics, a 4-by-4 matrix shall be used to transform the position, size, and orientations of objects
in a three-dimensional coordinate system. Only the first three columns of the matrix may be changed;
therefore, the matrix shall be expressed in PDF as an array of 12 numbers:
𝑎     𝑏    𝑐   0
𝑑     𝑒   𝑓    0
[                  ] = [𝑎   𝑏   𝑐   𝑑    𝑒      𝑓    𝑔   ℎ    𝑖     𝑡𝑥   𝑡𝑦   𝑡𝑧]
𝑔     ℎ    𝑖   0
𝑡𝑥   𝑡𝑦   𝑡𝑧   1
3D coordinate transformations shall be expressed as matrix transformations:
𝑎         𝑏   𝑐    0
𝑑         𝑒   𝑓    0
[𝑥 ′   𝑦′   𝑧′   1] = [𝑥    𝑦   𝑧   1] × [                      ]
𝑔        ℎ     𝑖   0
𝑡𝑥       𝑡𝑦   𝑡𝑧   1
Carrying out the multiplication has the following results:
𝑥 ′ = 𝑎 × 𝑥 + 𝑑 × 𝑦 + 𝑔 × 𝑧 + 𝑡𝑥
𝑦 ′ = 𝑏 × 𝑥 + 𝑒 × 𝑦 + ℎ × +𝑡𝑦
𝑧 ′ = 𝑐 × 𝑥 + 𝑓 × 𝑦 + 𝑖 × 𝑧 + 𝑡𝑧
Position and orientation of 3D artwork typically involves translation (movement) and rotation along
any axis. The virtual camera represents the view of the artwork. The relationship between camera and
artwork may be thought of in two ways:
•    The 3D artwork is in a fixed position and orientation, and the camera moves to different positions
and orientations.
•    The camera is in a fixed location, and the 3D artwork is translated and rotated.
678                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Both approaches may achieve the same visual effects; in practice, 3D systems typically use a
combination of both. Conceptually, there are three distinct coordinate systems:
•    The artwork coordinate system.
•    The camera coordinate system, in which the camera shall be positioned at (0, 0, 0) facing out along
the positive z axis, with the positive x axis to the right and the positive y axis going straight up.
•    An intermediate system called the world coordinate system.
Two 3D transformation matrices shall be used in coordinate conversions:
•    The artwork-to-world matrix specifies the position and orientation of the artwork in the world
coordinate system. This matrix shall be contained in the 3D stream.
•    The camera-to-world matrix specifies the position and orientation of the camera in the world
coordinate system. This matrix shall be specified by either the C2W or U3DPath entries of the 3D
view dictionary.
When drawing 3D artwork in a 3D annotation’s target coordinate system, the following
transformations take place:
Artwork coordinates shall be transformed to world coordinates:
[𝑥w 𝑦w 𝑧w 1] = [𝑥a 𝑦a 𝑧a 1] × aw
World coordinates shall be transformed to camera coordinates:
[𝑥c 𝑦c 𝑧c 1] = [𝑥w 𝑦w 𝑧w 1] × (cw −1 )
The first two steps can be expressed as a single equation, as follows:
[𝑥c 𝑦c 𝑧c 1] = [𝑥a 𝑦a 𝑧a 1] × (aw × cw −1 )
Finally, the camera coordinates shall be projected into two dimensions, eliminating the z coordinate,
then scaled and positioned to make the scene contents fit within the annotation’s target coordinate
system.
NOTE        The above paragraph was clarified in this document (2020).
13.6.6            3D markup
Beginning with PDF 1.7, users may comment on specific views of 3D artwork by using markup
annotations (see 12.5.6.2, "Markup annotations"). Markup annotations (as other annotations) are
normally associated with a location on a page. To associate the markup with a specific view of a 3D
annotation, the annotation dictionary for the markup annotation contains an ExData entry (see "Table
173 — Additional entries in markup annotation dictionaries specific to external data") that specifies
the 3D annotation and view. "Table 324 — Entries in an external data dictionary used to markup 3D
annotations" describes the entries in an external data dictionary used to markup 3D annotations.
Table 324 — Entries in an external data dictionary used to markup 3D annotations
Key            Type            Value
Type           name            (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall
be ExData for an external data dictionary.
Subtype        name            (Required) The type of external data that this dictionary describes; shall
be Markup3D for a 3D comment. The only defined value is Markup3D.
3DA            dictionary or   (Required) The 3D annotation to which this markup annotation applies.
text string     The 3D annotation may be specified as a child dictionary or as the name
of a 3D annotation, as specified by its NM entry. In the latter case, the
3D annotation and the markup annotation shall be on the same page of
the document.
3DV            dictionary      (Required) The 3D view that this markup annotation is associated with.
The annotation will be hidden unless this view is currently being used
for the 3D annotation specified by 3DA.
MD5            byte string     (Optional) A 16-byte string that contains the checksum of the bytes of
the 3D stream data that this 3D comment shall be associated with. The
checksum shall be calculated by applying the standard MD5 message-
digest algorithm (described in Internet RFC 1321) to the bytes of the
stream data. This value shall be used to determine if artwork data has
changed since this 3D comment was created.
NOTE    This is strictly a checksum, and is not used for security purposes.
In a Markup3D ExData dictionary, the 3DA entry identifies the 3D annotation to which the markup
shall be associated. Even though the markup annotation exists alongside the associated annotation in
the page’s Annots array, the markup may be thought of as a child of the 3DA annotation.
The 3DV entry specifies the markup’s associated 3D view. The markup shall only be printed and
displayed when the specified view is the current view of its parent 3D annotation. This ensures that the
proper context is preserved when the markup is displayed.
NOTE         An equivalent view is not sufficient; if more than one markup specify equivalent views
represented by different objects, the markups will not display simultaneously.
The MD5 entry gives interactive PDF processors a means to detect whether or not the 3D stream of the
3D annotation specified by 3DA has changed. If the 3D stream has changed, the context provided by
the 3DV entry may no longer apply, and the markup may no longer be useful. Any action taken as a
response to such a situation is dependent on the interactive PDF processor, but a warning shall be
issued to the user.
EXAMPLE            The following example shows how markup annotations can be associated with particular views. This
example was corrected in this document (2020).
2 0 obj                                        %3D stream data with two named views
<<
/Type /3D
/Subtype /U3D
/VA [4 0 R 5 0 R]
…
>>
680                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
stream
…
endstream
endobj
3 0 obj                                           %3D annotation
<<
/Type /Annot
/Subtype /3D
/3DD 2 0 R
…
>>
endobj
4 0 obj                                           %CommentView1
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (CommentView1)
…
>>
endobj
5 0 obj                                           %CommentView2
<<
/Type /3DView
/XN (CommentView2)
…
>>
endobj
6 0 obj                                           %Cloud comment with no ExData
<<
/Type /Annot
/Subtype /Polygon
/IT /PolygonCloud
…
>>
endobj
7 0 obj                                           %Callout comment on CommentView1
<<
/Type /Annot
/Subtype /FreeText
/IT /FreeTextCallout
/ExData <<
/Type /ExData
/Subtype /Markup3D
/3DA 3 0 R
/3DV 4 0 R
>>
…
>>
endobj
8 0 obj                                           %Dimension comment on CommentView2
<<
/Type /Annot
/Subtype /Line
/IT /LineDimension
/ExData
<<
/Type /ExData
/Subtype /Markup3D
/3DA 3 0 R
/3DV 5 0 R
>>
…
>>
endobj
9 0 obj                                    %Stamp comment on CommentView2
<<
/Type /Annot
/Subtype /Stamp
/ExData
<<
/Type /ExData
/Subtype /Markup3D
/3DA 3 0 R
/3DV 5 0 R
>>
…
>>
endobj
The following illustrations show the placement of markup on annotations on different views of the
same 3D artwork.
Figure 102 — 3D artwork set to its default view
"Figure 102 — 3D artwork set to its default view" shows the default view, which has no markup
annotations.
Figure 103 — 3D artwork set to CommentView1
"Figure 103 — 3D artwork set to CommentView1" shows another view to which a markup annotation
is applied.
682                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Figure 104 — 3D artwork set to CommentView2
"Figure 104 — 3D artwork set to CommentView2" shows a view referenced by two markup
annotations:
•    A line annotation (/Subtype /Line) with a line dimension intent (/IT/ LineDimension)
•    A stamp annotation (/Subtype /Stamp)
13.6.7            Persistence of 3D measurements and markups
13.6.7.1          General
Beginning with PDF 2.0, it is possible to add 3D measurement data to an instance of a 3D artwork.
These measurement data are stored in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary. 3D measurements are
associated with 3D views, and each 3D view is able to contain zero or more 3D measurement
dictionaries.
After a measurement is associated with view, it shall be visible only when that view is selected or
active in an interactive PDF processor. As different views are displayed, the measurements associated
with that view shall be made visible and previously displayed measurements become invisible.
3D measurements are either simple 3D markups used to add information to the geometric data shown
in a view, or have an associated comment, in which case they have all the associated functionality of a
comment. A 3D measurement is able to be promoted or demoted to or from comment status.
There are three key aspects to defining persistent 3D measurements:
•    A mechanism to define the units associated with the geometric data being measured. A 3DU entry
in "Table 309 — Additional entries specific to a 3D annotation", has as its value a 3D units
dictionary, which stores the units data for this 3D annotation. (See "Table 325 — Entries in a 3D
units dictionary" for more information.)
•    The association between 3D measurements and 3D view is realised through the MA entry in a 3D
view dictionary (see "Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view dictionary"). The value of this entry is an
array of 3D measurement/markup dictionaries, where each dictionary represents an instance of a
3D measurement to be displayed in the context of this view. For more information about 3D
measurement dictionaries, see 13.6.7.3, "3D measurement/markup dictionary".
•    When a 3D measurement is promoted to a comment, a projection annotation ("see 12.5.6.24,
"Projection annotations") is created to manage the comment and its appearance in the comments
list. An indirect reference to this projection annotation is placed in the 3D measurement
dictionary. (See 13.6.7.3, "3D measurement/markup dictionary".)
13.6.7.2        The 3D units dictionary
The data associated with a 3D artwork annotation may be defined in an arbitrary 3D coordinate system.
For viewing purposes, the interactive PDF processor shall define a camera to map these coordinates
onto a view surface. (3D coordinate systems are discussed in 13.6.5, "Coordinate systems for 3D".) For
measurement purposes, distances are computed in this arbitrary coordinate system and assigned
physical meaning by entries in the 3D units dictionary. These sets of optional units shall be defined:
•    Creation time units: Units known at the time the 3D artwork annotation is created.
•    User override units: Units defined by the user after the annotation was created.
•    Display units: Units that the user would like used when displaying distances for all newly created
measurements.
The first two definitions assign physical meaning to measured distances, and the third defines how the
distances are presented. When a 3D annotation is created, the application may have information from
external sources that allows it to determine the units of the data being imported. Later the user may
want to either override that definition or control what units data are displayed in.
In addition to defining the units, a scaling operation shall be defined that maps one set of units to
another. For the creation time and user override units, the mapping states that "m model data units = n
real units". For the display units, the mapping states that "m model units = n display units". In most
cases, the m and n scale values shall be 1.0 because most data are defined in some well-known units
system, such as meters or inches.
The entries in the 3D units dictionary establish these mappings for each set of units (creation time, user
override, and display units). The 3D Units dictionary is referenced in "Table 309 — Additional entries
specific to a 3D annotation" as the value of the 3DU entry.
Table 325 — Entries in a 3D units dictionary
Key       Type          Value
TSm       number        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The creation time units m scale value. If omitted, TSm
defaults to 1.0; if included, TU shall exist.
TSn       number        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The creation time units n scale value. If omitted, TSn
defaults to 1.0; if included, TU shall exist.
TU        text string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) The creation time units value. A text string specifying a
label for displaying the units represented by this dictionary in a user
interface.
NOTE 1 It is recommended that the label use a universally recognised
abbreviation.
USm       number        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The user defined units m scale value. If omitted, USm
defaults to 1.0; if included, UU shall exist.
USn       number        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The user defined units n scale value. If omitted, USn
defaults to 1.0; if included, UU shall exist.
684                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key         Type           Value
UU          text string    (Optional; PDF 2.0) The user override units value. A text string specifying a
label for displaying the units represented by this dictionary in a user
interface.
NOTE 2 It is recommended that the label use a universally recognised
abbreviation.
DSm         number         (Optional; PDF 2.0) The display units m scale value. If omitted, DSm
defaults to 1.0; if included, DU shall exist.
DSn         number         (Optional; PDF 2.0) The display units n scale value. If omitted, DSn defaults
to 1.0; if included, DU shall exist.
DU          text string    (Optional; PDF 2.0) The display units value. A text string specifying a label
for displaying the units represented by this dictionary in a user interface.
NOTE 3 It is recommended that the label use a universally recognised
abbreviation.
The following algorithm shall be used to map model space distances for display in 3D measurements
for each of the three sets of units.
Starting from these default values:
n = 1.0 // a number
m = 1.0 // a number
Units = "Model Units"                 // a text string
In the algorithm that follows, an entry is defined if it is included in the 3D Units dictionary.
Creation time units – The following is the process creation time units definition:
If TU is defined, then Units = TU
If TSm is defined, then m = TSm
If TSn is defined, then n = TSn
If either TSm or TSn is defined, TU should be included in the 3D Units dictionary; if TU is not defined
in this case, the unit specification is undefined and shall be ignored.
User override units – The following is the process user override units definition:
If UU is defined, then Units = UU
If USm is defined, then m = USm
If USn is defined, then n = USn
If either USm or USn is defined, UU should be included in the 3D Units dictionary; if UU is not defined
in this case, the unit specification is undefined and is ignored.
Display units – The following is the display units definition:
If DU is defined, then Units = DU
If DSm is defined, then m = m × DSm
If DSn is defined, then n = n × DSn
If either DSm or DSn is defined, DU should be included in the 3D Units dictionary; if DU is not defined
in this case, the unit specification is undefined and is ignored.
Finally, if X is a model space distance and Y is the displayed value, the functional relationship between
X and Y is given by the equation Y Units = (m/n) × X.
13.6.7.3        3D measurement/markup dictionary
13.6.7.3.1      General
The MA entry of "Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view dictionary" contains an array of 3D measurement
dictionaries, where each dictionary represents an instance of a 3D measurement to be displayed in the
context of this view. Each 3D measurement dictionary describes the type of the 3D measurement
through the Subtype entry, as well as provides a name for the measurement as it may appear in the
user interface of an colour PDF processor.
The entries of the 3D Measurement/Markup dictionary are described in "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D
measurement/markup dictionary common to all markup subtypes".
Table 326 — Entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary common to all markup subtypes
Key      Type    Value
Type     name    (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, it shall be 3DMeasure for a 3D measurement dictionary.
686                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type     Value
Subtype name        (Required; PDF 2.0) A name specifying the measurement type for this
measurement which shall be chosen from the following:
LD3     A linear dimension measurement is used to denote the distance between
two arbitrary points on a 3D model. See 13.6.7.3.2, "3D linear
dimension measurement" for a listing of additional entries in this
dictionary.
PD3     A perpendicular dimension measurement is used to denote the
perpendicular distance between two geometric entities (normally two
lines or a point and a line). See "Table 328 — Additional entries in a 3D
measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D perpendicular dimension
measurement" for a listing of additional entries in this dictionary.
AD3     An angular dimension measurement is used to denote the angle
between two linear entities. See "Table 329 — Additional entries in a
3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D angular dimension
measurement" for a listing of additional entries in this dictionary.
RD3     A radial dimension measurement is used to define the radius or
diameter of a circular 3D entity. See "Table 330 — Additional entries in
a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D radial dimension
measurement" for a listing of additional entries in this dictionary.
3DC     A 3D comment note lets users connect a comment to a specific piece of
geometry in the 3D model. See "Table 331 — Additional entries in a 3D
measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D comment note" for a listing
of additional entries in this dictionary.
TRL        text     (Optional; PDF 2.0) A name string that may be associated with a measurement
string   markup. If omitted, an interactive PDF processor may create one.
Interactive PDF processors that do not provide a user interface for such
elements should ignore this field.
The TRL field contains the current name for the measurement markup. Each measurement markup is
assigned a name ("Measurement 1", "3D Comment 22", … and so on) when it is created. These names
may be shown by an interactive PDF processor so that users can see what measurements are
associated with what views. Users should be allowed to override the initially defined names.
13.6.7.3.2        3D linear dimension measurement
A 3D linear measurement is a markup showing the distance between two arbitrary points on a 3D
model. "Figure 105 — 3D linear measurement" shows an example.
Figure 105 — 3D linear measurement
As shown, a 3D linear measurement consists of two filled circles, called anchor points, one at each of the
two positions being measured, and a line with an arrowhead on each end connecting the two anchor
points (referred to as the measure line). This line is then labelled with a value representing the
distance between the two anchor points.
In addition to the entries in "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary common to
all markup subtypes", "Table 327 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a
3D linear dimension measurement" lists additional entries for a 3D measurement dictionary with a
Subtype value of LD3 for 3D linear measurement.
Table 327 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D linear
dimension measurement
Key   Type        Value
AP    array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the 3D
annotation plane on which the measurement markup will lie.
A1    array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space
position of the first anchor point in world space.
NOTE 1 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
N1    text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated with
anchor point 1 (A1). The part name is used to verify that the part exists and is
visible. If not, the measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no validation occurs.
A2    array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space
position of the second anchor point in world space.
NOTE 2 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
N2    text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated with
anchor point 2 (A2). The part name is used to verify that the part exists and is
visible. If not, the measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no validation occurs.
TP    array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the text anchor
point for the measurement value string.
688                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key     Type         Value
TY      array        (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the up direction
vector, called the text Y direction, for the text string presenting the measurement
value string.
TS      number       (Optional; PDF 2.0) A number representing the measurement text string height
defined in points in the default user space. The measurement text shall be zoom
invariant.
The default is 12 points.
C       array        (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of three numbers in the range 0.0 to 1.0 that
represent the DeviceRGB colour of the measurement markup.
The default value is the array [1 1 1], representing the colour white.
V       number       (Required; PDF 2.0) A numeric value representing a measurement value.
This value is converted to a text string and displayed as part of the measurement
text string.
U       text string (Required; PDF 2.0) A text string, called the units string, which represents the
units for the measurement.
P       integer      (Optional; PDF 2.0) The number of decimal digits, which represents the precision,
shown for the measurement value (V).
The default is 3, if P is not specified.
UT      text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) A string defined by the user that is appended to the end of the
measurement value string. If omitted, no string is appended.
S       dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A comment reference is an indirect reference to a projection
annotation that may be associated with this 3D measurement. See 13.6.7.4, "3D
measurements and projection annotations".
"Figure 106 — Parameters for a 3D linear measurement" depicts some of the parameters for a 3D
linear measurement.
The value text should be drawn on the annotation plane (AP) where the horizontal text path is defined
by the vector from A1 to A2 with the text up direction defined by the vector TY. The lower left corner
of the text box is positioned at the text anchor point (TP).
NOTE 1       A PDF viewer can choose to display the text aligned to the viewing plane, if it makes more sense
in a particular use such as printing a legend.
Figure 106 — Parameters for a 3D linear measurement
The actual Y-axis shall be formed by taking the cross product of AP and (A2 - A1). The vector TY shall
be used only to determine the orientation of this Y-axis.
If the text position TP is outside the area between A1 and A2, an extension line collinear to the
measure line connecting TP to the closest anchor point is generated.
There are three parts to the text string displayed with the measurement, a numeric value (V), a units
string (U), and an optional user string (UT). The display of the numeric value field number is also
controlled by the precision value (P), which indicates how many digits to display to the right of the
decimal point. The viewer should convert the numeric value to a string and combine it with the units
string and user text as appropriate. This process is viewer dependent.
13.6.7.3.3       3D perpendicular dimension measurement
A perpendicular measurement is used to denote the perpendicular distance between two geometric
entities (normally two lines or a point and a line) as illustrated here.
Figure 107 — Perpendicular measurement
"Figure 107 — Perpendicular measurement" shows a perpendicular measurement markup consists of
two filled circles at the anchor points, two parallel extension lines (referred to as leader lines) starting
at the anchor points and extending away from the anchor points. There is also a labelled line with
arrowheads on both sides (referred to as the measure line) indicating that the distance shown is the
perpendicular distance between the two parallel lines.
In addition to the entries in "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary common to
all markup subtypes", the following entries are defined for a I with a Subtype value of PD3 for 3D
perpendicular measurement.
Table 328 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D
perpendicular dimension measurement
Key     Type      Value
AP      array     (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the 3D annotation
plane on which the measurement markup will lie.
A1      array     (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space
position of the first anchor point in world space.
NOTE 1 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
690                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key      Type         Value
N1       text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated with
anchor point 1 (A1). The part name is used to verify that the part exists and is
visible. If not, the measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no validation occurs.
A2       array        (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space
position of the second anchor point in world space.
NOTE 2 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
N2       text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated with
anchor point 2 (A2). The part name is used to verify that the part exists and is
visible. If not, the measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no validation occurs.
D1       array        (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the direction
vector for leader lines associated with the anchor points (A1 and A2).
TP       array        (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the text anchor
point for the measurement value string.
TY       array        (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the up direction
vector, called the text Y direction, for the text string presenting the measurement
value string.
TS       number       (Optional; PDF 2.0) A number representing the measurement text string height
defined in points in the default user space. The measurement text shall be zoom
invariant.
The default is 12 points.
C        array        (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of three numbers in the range 0.0 to 1.0, representing
the DeviceRGB colour of the measurement markup.
The default value is the array [1 1 1], representing the colour white.
V        number       (Required; PDF 2.0) A numeric value representing a measurement value. This value
is converted to a text string and displayed as part of the measurement text string.
U        text string (Required; PDF 2.0) A string, called the units string, representing the units for the
measurement.
P        integer      (Optional; PDF 2.0) The number of decimal digits, which represents the precision,
shown for the measurement value (V).
The default is 3, if P is not specified.
UT       text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) A string defined by the user that is appended to the end of the
measurement value string. If omitted, no string is appended.
S        dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A comment reference is an indirect reference to a projection
annotation that may be associated with this 3D measurement. See 13.6.7.4, "3D
measurements and projection annotations".
Figure 108 — Parameters associated with the perpendicular dimension
"Figure 108 — Parameters associated with the perpendicular dimension" illustrates the parameters
associated with the perpendicular dimension and shows the measure markup and parameters. All the
markup items are drawn on the annotation plane (as defined by AP). The text layout is defined in a
similar manner as for linear dimensions. The lower-left corner of the text box is positioned at the text
anchor point (TP), and the text's X-axis is aligned with the measure line. The text will flow in the
direction defined by a vector from A1 to A2. The text's up direction is defined as the cross product of
the annotation plane normal and the text X-axis, in the direction defined by the TY parameter.
In addition to controlling text position, the text anchor point (TP) also controls the lengths of the
leader lines and the placement of the measure line. Because the leader lines are parallel and the
measure line is required to be perpendicular to both leader lines, the intersection of the leader lines
and the measure line is easily computed.
If the text position TP is outside the area between A1 and A2, an extension line collinear to the
measure line connecting TP to the closest anchor point is generated.
There are three parts to the text string displayed with the measurement: a numeric value (V), a units
string (U), and an optional user string (UT). The display of the numeric value field number is also
controlled by the precision value (P), which indicates how many digits to display to the right of the
decimal point. The viewer should convert the numeric value to a string and combine it with the units
string and user text as appropriate. This process is viewer dependent.
13.6.7.3.4     3D angular dimension measurement
An angular measurement is used to denote the angle between two linear entities, as shown in "Figure
109 — 3D Angular Dimension Measurement".
Figure 109 — 3D Angular Dimension Measurement
"Figure 109 — 3D Angular Dimension Measurement" shows an angular measurement markup
consisting of two anchor points, one located on each of the two linear entities whose angle is being
measured. Connected to each anchor point is an extension line that is collinear with the edge it
692                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
measures. A labelled arc, with an arrowhead at each end, connects the two extension lines, making it
clear which angle is being measured.
In addition to the entries in "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary common to
all markup subtypes", "Table 329 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a
3D angular dimension measurement" lists entries defined for a 3D measurement dictionary with a
Subtype value of AD3 for 3D angular measurement.
Table 329 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D angular
dimension measurement
Key      Type          Value
AP       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the 3D
annotation plane on which the measurement markup lies.
A1       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model
space position of the first anchor point in world space.
NOTE 1 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this
view.
D1       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the
direction vector for the leader line associated with the first anchor point
(A1).
N1       text string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated
with anchor point 1 (A1). The part name is used to verify that the part exists
and is visible. If not, the measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no
validation occurs.
A2       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model
space position of the second anchor point in world space.
NOTE 2 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this
view.
D2       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the
direction vector for the leader line associated with the second anchor point
(A2).
N2       text string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated
with anchor point 2 (A2). The part name is used to verify that the part exists
and is visible. If not, the measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no
validation occurs.
TP       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the text
anchor point for the measurement value string.
TX       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the
horizontal direction vector for the text string presenting the measurement
value string.
TY       array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the up
direction vector, called the text Y direction, for the text string presenting the
measurement value string.
Key     Type          Value
TS      number        (Optional; PDF 2.0) A number representing the measurement text string
height defined in points in the default user space. The measurement text shall
be zoom invariant.
The default is 12 points.
C       array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of three numbers in the range 0.0 to 1.0,
representing the DeviceRGB colour of the measurement markup.
The default value is the array [1 1 1], representing the colour white.
V       number        (Required; PDF 2.0) A numeric value representing a measurement value. This
value is converted to a text string and displayed as part of the measurement
text string.
P       integer       (Optional; PDF 2.0) The number of decimal digits, which represents the
precision, shown for the measurement value (V).
The default is 3, if P is not specified.
UT      text string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) A text string defined by the user that is appended to the
end of measurement value string. If omitted, no string is appended.
DR      boolean       (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates whether degrees or radians are
shown in angular measurements. If DR is true, angular measurements are
shown in degrees.
The default is true.
S       dictionary    (Optional; PDF 2.0) A comment reference is an indirect reference to a
projection annotation that may be associated with this 3D measurement. See
13.6.7.4, "3D measurements and projection annotations".
The key geometric parameters for an angular dimension are shown in "Figure 110 — Geometric
parameters for an angular dimension".
Figure 110 — Geometric parameters for an angular dimension
The angle is defined by the measurement value V (30 in "Figure 110 — Geometric parameters for an
angular dimension") and is the angle between the leader direction vectors (D1 and D2). The angular
measurement markup is generated by first computing the centre point of the angle, cp in this figure.
The text position (TP) controls the position of the measurement text, the placement of the angle arc,
and the length and direction of the extension lines. The extension lines are drawn from the anchor
point to a point at a distance ||TP-cp|| from the centre point cp along the associated direction vector,
694                                                                            © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
which is the intersection of the angle arc and the extension line. The angle arc centre is at the centre
point cp (and its radius is ||TP - cp||) and is drawn between the two extensions lines. The markup text
is displayed (based on the text orientation parameters) with the lower-left corner of the text string
starting at the text position (TP).
The text layout is defined in a similar manner as for other dimensions. The lower-left corner of the text
box is positioned at the text anchor point (TP), and the text's X-axis is defined by the vector TX. Note
that the vector TX is expected to be orthogonal with the annotation plane normal. The text's up
direction is defined as the cross product of the annotation plane normal and the text X-axis, in the
direction defined by the TY parameter.
The measurement value is interpreted as either being in degrees or radians as defined by the (DR)
value, and the appropriate label string is created.
There are three parts to the text string displayed with the measurement: a numeric value (V), a
degrees or radians string (U), and an optional user string (UT). The display of the numeric value field
number is also controlled by the precision value (P), which indicates how many digits to display to the
right of the decimal point. The viewer should convert the numeric value to a string and combine it with
the degrees or radians string and user text as appropriate. This process is viewer dependent.
There are some special cases:
•    Parallel direction vectors (D1 and D2) are invalid, and no markup is generated.
•    If the text position TP is outside the cone of the angle, an extension line is added to connect the
text with the angle arc.
13.6.7.3.5        3D radial dimension
The radial measurement is used to define the radius or diameter of a circular 3D entity. "Figure 111 —
3D Radial Dimension" illustrates two examples of a radial dimension.
Figure 111 — 3D Radial Dimension
As shown on the left, the basic markup for a radial dimension consists of an arrow pointing to a circle
or arc that is connected to a leader line and text label that defines the radius or diameter. If the arrow
is positioned such that it is off the underlying arc, as in the figure on the right, an extension arc is
generated that clarifies which arc is being measured.
For radius measurements, the measure value is preceded by an "R" in the measure string. For diameter
values, the measure value is preceded by the diameter symbol (⌀).
In addition to the entries in "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary common to
all markup subtypes", "Table 330 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a
3D radial dimension measurement" lists entries defined for a 3D measurement dictionary with a
Subtype value of RD3 for 3D radial measurement.
Table 330 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D radial
dimension measurement
Key Type           Value
AP     array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the 3D annotation plane
on which the measurement markup lies.
A1     array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space position
of the first anchor point, called the circle centre point, in world space.
NOTE 1 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
A2     array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space position
of the second anchor point, which is a point on the arc, in world space.
NOTE 2 It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
N2     text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated with anchor
point 2 (A2). The part name is used to verify that the part exists and is visible. If not, the
measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no validation occurs.
A3     array       (Required for arcs only; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers that defines the start of
the arc being measured. This entry is required if the geometry being measured is an arc.
See "Figure 113 — Defining a radial dimension for an arc" for a visual representation of
A3.
A4     array       (Required for arcs only; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers that defines the end of
the arc being measured. This entry is required if the geometry being measured is an arc.
See "Figure 113 — Defining a radial dimension for an arc" for a visual representation of
A4.
TP     array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the text anchor point for
the measurement value string.
TX     array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the horizontal direction
vector for the text string presenting the measurement value string.
TY     array       (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the up direction vector
for the text string presenting the measurement value string.
EL     number      (Optional; PDF 2.0) The length of the extension line in points. The default is 60 points.
TS     number      (Optional; PDF 2.0) A number representing the measurement text string height defined in
points in the default user space. The measurement text shall be zoom invariant.
The default is 12 points.
C      array       (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of three numbers in the range 0.0 to 1.0, representing the
DeviceRGB colour of the measurement markup.
The default value is the array [1 1 1], representing the colour white.
696                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key Type            Value
V      number       (Required; PDF 2.0) A numeric value representing a measurement value. This value is
converted to a text string and displayed as part of the measurement text string.
U      text string (Required; PDF 2.0) A string representing the units for the measurement.
P      integer      (Optional; PDF 2.0) The number of decimal digits, which represents the precision, shown
for the measurement value (V).
The default is 3, if P is not specified.
UT     text string (Optional; PDF 2.0) A string defined by the user that is appended to the end of
measurement value string. If omitted, no string is appended.
SC     boolean      (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates whether the underlying circle, or arc, is shown or
not. If true, the underlying circle associated with a radial dimension is displayed. The
circle or arc shall be redrawn in the markup colour (C).
The default is false, not to show the circle.
R      boolean      (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates whether the measurement value is for a radius or
a diameter. If true, the measurement value associated with a radial measurement
represents a radius, as opposed to a diameter value.
The default is true, the measurement value represents a radius.
S      dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A comment reference is an indirect reference to a projection
annotation that may be associated with this 3D measurement. See 13.6.7.4, "3D
measurements and projection annotations".
The parameters for defining the radial measurement for a circle are shown in "Figure 112 — Defining
the radial measurement for a circle".
Figure 112 — Defining the radial measurement for a circle
The circle being measured is defined by two points lying on the annotation plane, a circle centre A1,
and a point on the circle A2. For radial measurement, the text position (TP) controls the text string
position, the arrow line orientation, and the extension line. The arrow line is drawn from the text
position (TP) to the intersection point between the circle and a line from text position to the circle
centre. The extension line will be drawn from the text position (TP) in the direction of the text string's
X-axis (TX). The length of the extension line is defined by the EL parameter. The left centre of measure
value string will begin at the end of the extension line. Note that the vector TX is expected to be
orthogonal with the annotation plane normal. The text's up direction is defined as the cross product of
the annotation plane normal and the text X-axis, in the direction defined by the TY parameter.
The parameters for defining a radial dimension for an arc are very similar, as shown in "Figure 113 —
Defining a radial dimension for an arc".
Figure 113 — Defining a radial dimension for an arc
There are three parts to the text string displayed with the measurement: a numeric value (V), a units
string (U), and an optional user string (UT). The display of the numeric value field number is also
controlled by the precision value (P), which indicates how many digits to display to the right of the
decimal point. The viewer should convert the numeric value to a string and combine it with the units
string and user text as appropriate. This process is viewer dependent.
13.6.7.3.6      3D comment note
3D comment notes let users connect a comment to a specific piece of geometry in the 3D model. The
markup consists of a leader line that connects the model to a text box placed in the 3D scene. The text
box is rendered so that the text is always facing the user.
Commenting functionality is specified by creating a projection annotation that represents the 3D
measurement/ markup within the commenting system. See 13.6.7.4, "3D measurements and projection
annotations" for additional details.
In addition to the entries in "Table 326 — Entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary common to
all markup subtypes", "Table 331 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a
3D comment note" lists entries defined for a 3D measurement dictionary with a Subtype value of 3DC
for 3D comment notes.
Table 331 — Additional entries in a 3D measurement/markup dictionary for a 3D comment
note
Key   Type          Value
A1    array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the model space position of
the first anchor point in world space.
NOTE    It is assumed that this is a position on the 3D model associated with this view.
N1    text string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) The name of the part (or model tree node) associated with anchor point 1
(A1). The part name is used to verify that the part exists and is visible. If not, the
measurement is not displayed. If omitted, no validation occurs.
698                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key           Type          Value
TP            array         (Required; PDF 2.0) A three-element array of numbers specifying the text anchor point for the
measurement value string.
TB            array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) A two-element integer array defining the x and y size of the text box to
contain the user text string (UT). The x value is defined as a number of characters shown in
the x direction (the top row); the y value is the number of rows of text. The interactive PDF
processor is free to flow the text in the text box as appropriate. If the entire string does not fit,
it may be truncated. The interactive PDF processor may also choose any font in which to
render the content, though a monospaced font is recommended.
TS            number        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The text size – a number representing the measurement text string height
defined in points in the default user space. The measurement text shall be zoom invariant.
Default value: 12.
C             array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of three numbers in the range 0.0 to 1.0, representing the
DeviceRGB colour of the measurement markup.
The default value is the array [1 1 1], representing the colour white.
UT            text string   (Optional; PDF 2.0) The text string displayed as the contents of the 3D comment note.
S             dictionary    (Optional; PDF 2.0) A comment reference is an indirect reference to a projection annotation
that may be associated with this 3D measurement. See "Table 341 — Entries in a
RichMediaContent dictionary".
The first anchor point (A1) defines the connection to the model. The model space text position TP field
defines placement of the corner of the text box that lies closest to anchor point 1 (A1) in the current
view. The user string field contains the text to be fitted into the text box.
13.6.7.4                3D measurements and projection annotations
Associations between a 3D measurement and a projection annotation are created by defining an
indirect reference to a dictionary in both the projection annotation and the 3D measurement.
•     Projection annotation: When the projection annotation (see 12.5.6.24, "Projection annotations")
is created, the ExData entry (an external data dictionary) is defined and used to manage the
association between the 3D measurement and the comment. "Table 332 — Entries in the external
data dictionary of a projection annotation" describes the entries in the external data dictionary of
the projection annotation that are used for referencing a 3D measurement.
•     3D measurement: The value of the S entry in the 3D measurement dictionary is an indirect
reference to a projection annotation dictionary of the associated comment.
Table 332 — Entries in the external data dictionary of a projection annotation
Key           Type          Value
Type          name          (Required; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if present,
shall be ExData for an external data dictionary.
Subtype       name          (Required; PDF 2.0) The type of external data that this dictionary describes; shall be
3DM for an association to a 3D measurement.
Key        Type        Value
M3DREF     dictionary (Required; PDF 2.0) An indirect reference to a 3D measurement dictionary for which
this projection annotation is a comment. See 12.5.6.24, "Projection annotations".
13.7 Rich media
13.7.1          General
PDF 2.0 introduces rich media annotations providing a common framework for video, audio,
animations and other multimedia presentations. For the allowed instances of rich media see "Table
342 — Entries in a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary". The framework includes general controls most
of which are commonly needed to stage, present and control an animation, video or other interactive
presentation. Such features as: when to activate and deactivate the presentation, supplying scripts that
control the presentation, setting viewing parameters such as lighting and camera angles (e.g., for 3D
interactive presentations), setting animation parameters such as speed and looping behaviour,
supplying assets including the base video, audio and animations files as well as any necessary auxiliary
files (e.g., scripts), determining how the rich media annotation relates to the page display (e.g., within a
fixed rectangle on the page, or having its own window), and details determining configuration of
toolbars, navigation and other controls.
Not all of these common framework features are appropriate for all rich media types and selected
media types have additional features defined specific to that type. The details for the framework and
specific controls are given in the following subclauses.
13.7.2          RichMedia annotations
13.7.2.1        General
The annotation subtype RichMedia shares many low-level structural similarities with the 3D Artwork
defined in 13.6, "3D Artwork". At the top level, the rich media annotation has two primary custom
structures. The RichMediaSettings dictionary is unique to each annotation, while the RichMediaContent
dictionary can be shared across rich-media annotations.
The rich media annotation may contain any of the entries of an annotation dictionary (see 12.5.2,
"Annotation dictionaries"). "Table 333 — Additional entries specific to a RichMedia annotation" shows
the additional annotation entries specific to this type of annotation.
Table 333 — Additional entries specific to a RichMedia annotation
Key                   Type        Value
Subtype               name        (Required; PDF 2.0) The type of annotation that the dictionary describes.
The name shall be RichMedia for a rich media annotation.
RichMediaContent      dictionary (Required; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaContent dictionary that stores the rich
media artwork and information as to how it should be configured and
viewed. See "Table 341 — Entries in a RichMediaContent dictionary".
700                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                    Type          Value
RichMediaSettings      dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaSettings dictionary that stores
conditions and responses that determine when the annotation should be
activated and deactivated by an interactive PDF processor and the initial
state of artwork in those states. See "Table 334 — Entries in a
RichMediaSettings dictionary".
Default value: If no RichMediaSettings dictionary is present, the first
configuration is loaded.
In addition to these entries, a RichMedia annotation shall provide an appearance stream in its AP entry
(see "Table 166 — Entries common to all annotation dictionaries ") that has a normal appearance (the
N entry in "Table 170 — Entries in an appearance dictionary"). This appearance may be used by
applications that do not support RichMedia annotations and by all applications for the initial display of
the annotation
As with 3D annotations defined in 13.6.2, "3D Annotations", RichMedia annotations can be in one of
two states:
•     Inactive: (the default initial state) The annotation displays the normal appearance of the
annotation.
NOTE          Typically, the normal appearance is a 2D bitmap portraying a rendering of the default view of the
artwork within the RichMedia annotation.
•     Active: The annotation displays a rendering of the artwork. This rendering is specified by the
annotation’s RichMediaSettings entry. (See "Table 334 — Entries in a RichMediaSettings
dictionary".)
The subsequent clauses describe the structural components of a rich media annotation, beginning with
the RichMediaSettings dictionary and its subcomponents, followed by the RichMediaContent
dictionary, and its subcomponents. See Example 3 for a detailed and comprehensive example of a rich
media annotation.
13.7.2.2          RichMediaSettings dictionary
13.7.2.2.1        General
The RichMediaSettings dictionary has a purpose similar to that of the 3D activation dictionary ("Table
310 — Entries in a 3D activation dictionary") with the 3D Annotation described in 13.6.2, "3D
Annotations". The RichMediaSettings dictionary stores the conditions and responses that occur in
response to certain events, such as activation and deactivation of the annotation, and contains two
dictionaries. "Table 334 — Entries in a RichMediaSettings dictionary" gives the details of the content of
this dictionary.
Table 334 — Entries in a RichMediaSettings dictionary
Key              Type          Value
Type             name          (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes.
If present, shall be RichMediaSettings.
Key               Type        Value
Activation        dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaActivation dictionary (see "Table 335 —
Entries in a RichMediaActivation dictionary") that specifies the style of
presentation, default script behavior, default view information, and
animation style when the annotation is activated.
Deactivation      dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaDeactivation dictionary (see "Table 336
— Entries in a RichMediaDeactivation dictionary") that specifies the
condition and type of unloading (restart or pause) that occurs during
deactivation.
13.7.2.2.2      RichMediaActivation dictionary
The RichMediaActivation dictionary specifies the style of presentation, default script behavior, default
view information, and animation style when the annotation is activated. "Table 335 — Entries in a
RichMediaActivation dictionary" details the contents of the dictionary.
The activation dictionary includes a script array. Each element contains an indirect object reference to
file specification objects that are also referenced by the Assets name tree of the RichMediaContent
dictionary. When the annotation is activated, each script in the array shall be executed in order in a
common environment per annotation by the rich media run time ECMAScript interpreter.
There may be an optional reference to a view in the scene’s Views array (see "Table 341 — Entries in a
RichMediaContent dictionary") that acts as the default view for the annotation. If not specified, the first
view in the views array shall be used. If there are no views specified, default values shall be used for all
camera and display parameters.
Table 335 — Entries in a RichMediaActivation dictionary
Key                 Type        Value
Type                name        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If present,
shall be RichMediaActivation.
Condition           name        (Optional; PDF 2.0) A name that shall specify the circumstances under which the
annotation shall be activated. The following values are valid:
XA the annotation is explicitly activated by a user action or script.
PO the annotation is activated as soon as the page that contains the annotation
receives focus as the current page.
PV the annotation is activated as soon as any part of the page that contains the
annotation becomes visible.
NOTE    One example is in a multiple-page presentation. Only one page is the current page
although several are visible.
Default value: XA.
Animation           dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaAnimation dictionary (see "Table 337 — Entries in a
RichMediaAnimation dictionary") that describes the preferred method that
interactive PDF processor should use to drive keyframe animations present in this
artwork.
702                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key               Type             Value
View              dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) An indirect object reference to a 3D view dictionary (see "Table
315 — Entries in a 3D view dictionary" that shall also be referenced by the Views
array within the annotation’s RichMediaContent dictionary (see "Table 341 —
Entries in a RichMediaContent dictionary").
Default value: The first element in the Views array of the annotation specified in
the RichMediaContent dictionary. If a Views array does not exist, default values for
the components of a 3D view dictionary (see "Table 344 — Additional entries in a
3D view dictionary") are used.
Configuration dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) An indirect object reference to a RichMediaConfiguration
dictionary (see "Table 342 — Entries in a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary") that
shall also be referenced by the Configurations array in the RichMediaContent
dictionary (see "Table 341 — Entries in a RichMediaContent dictionary").
Default value: The first element within the Configurations array specified in the
RichMediaContent dictionary.
Presentation      dictionary (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaPresentation dictionary (see "Table 338 — Entries
in a RichMediaPresentation dictionary") that contains information as to how the
annotation and user interface elements will be visually laid out and drawn.
13.7.2.2.3        RichMediaDeactivation dictionary
The second component of the RichMediaSettings dictionary is the RichMediaDeactivation dictionary,
which specifies the condition that causes deactivation of the annotation.
Table 336 — Entries in a RichMediaDeactivation dictionary
Key            Type            Value
Type           name            (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If
present, shall be RichMediaDeactivation.
Condition      name            (Optional; PDF 2.0) A name specifying the circumstances under which the
annotation shall be deactivated. The following values are valid:
XD the annotation is explicitly deactivated by a user action or script.
PC the annotation is deactivated as soon as the page that contains the
annotation loses focus as the current page.
PI the annotation is deactivated as soon as the entire page that contains the
annotation is no longer visible.
Default value: XD.
13.7.2.2.4        RichMediaAnimation dictionary
A RichMediaAnimation dictionary specifies the preferred method that interactive PDF processors
should use to apply timeline scaling to keyframe animations. It can also specify that keyframe
animations be played repeatedly. The Animation entry of the RichMediaActivation dictionary ("Table
335 — Entries in a RichMediaActivation dictionary") can specify a RichMediaAnimation dictionary.
A keyframe animation can be provided as part of 3D model content. "Table 337 — Entries in a
RichMediaAnimation dictionary" shows the entries in a RichMediaAnimation dictionary.
NOTE         Keyframe animation is an interactive feature that is highly dependent on the behaviour and
controls provided by the interactive PDF processor.
Table 337 — Entries in a RichMediaAnimation dictionary
Key          Type     Value
Type         name     (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If
present, the type shall be RichMediaAnimation.
Subtype      name     (Optional; PDF 2.0) The animation style described by this dictionary. Valid
values are None, Linear, and Oscillating.
See "Table 313 — Animation styles" for descriptions of these animation styles.
If an animation style is encountered other than those described, an animation
style of None shall be used.
Default value: None
PlayCount integer     (Optional; PDF 2.0) An integer specifying the play count for this animation style.
A nonnegative integer shall represent the number of times the animation is
played. A negative integer shall indicate that the animation is infinitely
repeated.
This value shall be ignored for an animation subtype of type None. Default
value: -1
Speed        number (Optional; PDF 2.0) A positive number specifying the speed that shall be used
when running the animation. A value greater than one shall shorten the time it
takes to play the animation, or effectively speed up the animation.
NOTE    This allows authors to change the desired speed of animations without re-
authoring the content.
This value shall be ignored for an animation subtype of type None. Default
value: 1
EXAMPLE          A RichMediaSettings dictionary
20 0 obj                                                 %RichMediaSettings dictionary
<</Type /RichMediaSettings
/Activation
<</Type /RichMediaActivation                       %RichMediaActivation Dictionary
/Condition /XA
/Configuration 14 0 R                           %Reference to element in Configurations array
/View 19 0 R                                    %Reference to element in Views array
/Animation                                      %RichMediaAnimation dictionary
<</Type /RichMediaAnimation
/Subtype /Linear
/Speed 1
/PlayCount -1
>>
/Presentation 21 0 R
/Scripts [32 0 R 33 0 R]                        %References to scripts in Resources name tree
>>
/Deactivation                                      %RichMediaDeactivation dictionary
<</Type /RichMediaDeactivation
/Condition /XD
>>
>>
704                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
endobj
13.7.2.2.5          RichMediaPresentation dictionary
The RichMediaPresentation dictionary contains information about how the annotation and user
interface elements should be visually laid out and drawn by an interactive PDF processor. The visibility
of the Toolbar is specified, and it will only take effect if the RichMediaConfiguration subtype is 3D.
(See "Table 342 — Entries in a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary")
User interface items such as a navigation panes and toolbars can be displayed or hidden by default.
Such user interface elements may only be implemented by those interactive PDF processors where it is
appropriate to do so.
NOTE           The navigation pane is a user interface item that would be used to display the hierarchical
relationship of entities within the artwork. (See 13.6.2, "3D Annotations".)
The Style of the annotation can be presented Embedded within the PDF page or separately Windowed.
If a Windowed state is chosen, the default dimensions and position of the window may be given. "Table
338 — Entries in a RichMediaPresentation dictionary" contains a description of each element.
Table 338 — Entries in a RichMediaPresentation dictionary
Key                   Type              Value
Type                  name              (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary
describes. If present, shall be RichMediaPresentation.
Style                 name              (Optional; PDF 2.0) The style of presentation of the rich media.
The value can be Embedded or Windowed. A interactive PDF
processor shall support the state Embedded.
Default value: Embedded
Window                dictionary        (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaWindow Dictionary that
describes the size and position of the floating user interface
window when the value for Style is set to Windowed. See "Table
339 — Entries in a RichMediaWindow dictionary" for a detailed
description.
Transparent           boolean           (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates whether the page
content shall be displayed through the transparent areas of the
rich media content (where the alpha value is less than 1.0). If
true, the rich media artwork shall be composited over the page
content using an alpha channel. If false, the rich media artwork
shall be drawn over an opaque background prior to composition
over the page content.
Default value: false
NavigationPane        boolean           (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates the default behavior of a
navigation pane user interface element. If true, the navigation
pane should be visible when the content is initially activated. If
false, the navigation pane should not displayed by default.
Default value: false
Key               Type             Value
Toolbar           boolean          (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates the default behavior of
an interactive toolbar associated with this annotation. If true, a
toolbar should be displayed when the annotation is activated
and given focus. If false, a toolbar should not displayed by
default.
The toolbar should be positioned in proximity to the annotation.
Default value: true for content of Subtype 3D, and false
otherwise.
PassContextClick boolean           (Optional; PDF 2.0) A flag that indicates whether a contextual
click on the rich media annotation is passed to the media player
run time or shall be handled natively by the interactive PDF
processor.
NOTE     A context click is usually generated by a mouse right-click
although it can be invoked by other means. This can include,
but is not limited to, an explicit context-menu keyboard key
or the combination of a mouse click and a keyboard modifier
key.
If false, the interactive PDF processor shall handle the context
click. If true, the interactive PDF processor shall allow the media
runtime to provide any user interface it wishes.
Default value: false
13.7.2.2.6      RichMediaWindow dictionary
The RichMediaWindow dictionary stores the dimensions and position of the floating window that an
interactive PDF processor may present. It is used only if Style (see "Table 339 — Entries in a
RichMediaWindow dictionary") is set to Windowed. The window described is a non-printing user
interface element. An interactive PDF processor that supports Windowed styles shall constrain the
window extent to be within the presentation area of the interactive PDF processor.
All coordinates shall be expressed in default user space units although do not rotate or scale the
window to match the orientation and magnification of the page. The expected behavior of the
interactive PDF processor is similar to how it presents an annotation when the flags NoZoom and
NoRotate are set to true. (See 12.5.3, "Annotation flags".) "Table 339 — Entries in a RichMediaWindow
dictionary" details the contents of this dictionary.
Table 339 — Entries in a RichMediaWindow dictionary
Key      Type         Value
Type     name         (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If
present, shall be RichMediaWindow.
Width    dictionary   (Optional; PDF 2.0) A dictionary with keys Default, Max, and Min
describing values for the width of the Window in default user space units.
Default values: Default shall be 288, Max shall be 576, and Min shall be 72
706                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key        Type            Value
Height     dictionary      (Optional; PDF 2.0) A dictionary with keys Default, Max, and Min
describing values for the width of the Window in default user space units.
Default values: Default shall be 216, Max shall be 432, and Min shall be 72
Position dictionary        (Optional; PDF 2.0) A RichMediaPosition dictionary describing the position
of the RichMediaWindow. See "Table 340 — Entries in a RichMediaPosition
dictionary" for a detailed description.
The position of the window in the interactive PDF processor presentation area is described by the
RichMediaPosition dictionary. The position of the window shall remain fixed, regardless of the page
translation. "Table 340 — Entries in a RichMediaPosition dictionary" details the contents of this
dictionary.
Table 340 — Entries in a RichMediaPosition dictionary
Key          Type       Value
Type         name       (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If
present, it shall be RichMediaPosition.
HAlign       name       (Optional; PDF 2.0) Describes the horizontal alignment. Valid values are Near,
Center, and Far.
Default value: Far
VAlign       name       (Optional; PDF 2.0) Describes the vertical alignment. Valid values are Near,
Center, and Far.
Default value: Near
HOffset      number     (Optional; PDF 2.0) The offset from the alignment point specified by the HAlign
key. A positive value for HOffset, when HAlign is either Near or Center, shall
offset the position towards the Far direction. A positive value for HOffset, when
HAlign is Far, shall offset the position towards the Near direction.
Default value: 18
VOffset      number     (Optional; PDF 2.0) The offset from the alignment point specified by the VAlign
key. A positive value for VOffset, when VAlign is either Near or Center, shall
offset the position towards the Far direction. A positive value for VOffset, when
VAlign is Far, shall offset the position towards the Near direction.
Default value: 18
The descriptions of the values of the HAlign and VAlign entries depend on the primary logical content
order as defined by the value of the Lang entry in the document's catalog dictionary. For left-to-right
reading languages, the descriptions follow.
HAlign: Near represents the left edge of the window, and Far represents the right edge of the window.
VAlign: Near represents the top edge of the window, and Far represents the bottom edge of the
window.
For right-to-left reading languages, the above descriptions for HAlign are reversed.
EXAMPLE        A RichMediaPresentation Dictionary
24 0 obj                                     %RichMediaPresentation dictionary
<</Type /RichMediaPresentation
/Toolbar false
/NavigationPane false
/PassContextClick false
/Style /Windowed
/Window 25 0 R
>>
endobj
25 0 obj                                     %RichMediaWindow dictionary
<</Type /RichMediaWindow
/Height
<</Default 216
/Max 432
/Min 72
>>
/Width
<</Default 288
/Max 576
/Min 72
>>
/Position
<</Type /RichMediaPosition             %RichMediaPosition dictionary
/HAlign /Far
/VAlign /Near
/HOffset 18
/VOffset 18
>>
>>
endobj
In the above example, the toolbar or the navigation pane shall not be displayed on initial activation of
the annotation. Context click events shall be handled by the interactive PDF processor and shall not be
passed to the annotation handler. The annotation appears as a separate window with an initial width
of four inches and an initial height of three inches and will be aligned 0.25 inches off the top right (in
left to right reading languages) corner of the document area.
13.7.2.3       RichMediaContent dictionary
13.7.2.3.1     General
The RichMediaContent dictionary contains content that is present within the annotation as referenced
by the RichMediaSettings dictionary (see "Table 334 — Entries in a RichMediaSettings dictionary").
"Table 341 — Entries in a RichMediaContent dictionary" details the elements of the RichMediaContent
dictionary.
Table 341 — Entries in a RichMediaContent dictionary
Key             Type        Value
Type            name        (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes.
If present, it shall be RichMediaContent.
708                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                 Type          Value
Assets              name tree (Optional; PDF 2.0) A name tree of embedded file specification
dictionaries as detailed in 7.11.3, "File specification dictionaries".
Configurations      array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array where each element is an indirect object
reference to a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary.
Views               array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array where each element is an indirect object
reference to a 3D view dictionary. See "Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view
dictionary" for the details of the entries of this dictionary.
Default value: If no views are specified, default values shall be used for
the components of a view dictionary, including rendering/lighting
modes, background colour, and camera data.
13.7.2.3.2        The assets name tree
The Assets entry takes a name tree of embedded file specification dictionaries. (For usage, see "Table
341 — Entries in a RichMediaContent dictionary" and "Table 343 — Entries in a RichMediaInstance
dictionary".)
The text string that represents the file name in the name tree shall match the values stored for both the
F and UF keys, which shall be the same value. The file name shall be encoded as a relative URI and has
the following naming restrictions:
•    The string shall be a PDF text string.
•    The string shall not contain any embedded NULL (U+0000) characters.
•    The number of characters in the string shall be between 1 and 255 inclusive.
•    The string shall not contain any of these six characters: COLON (U+003A) (:), ASTERISK (U+002A)
(*), QUOTATION MARK (U+0022) ("), LESS-THAN SIGN (U+003C) (<), GREATER-THAN SIGN
(U+003E) (>), and VERTICAL LINE (U+007C) (|).
•    The last character shall not be a FULL STOP (U+002E) (.).
EXAMPLE           Assets name tree
29 0 obj                                       % Assets name tree
<< /Names
[(3D.prc) 30 0 R
… more name value pairs where each value is a file specification dictionary reference
…
]
>>
endobj
30 0 obj                                                   % File specification dictionary for 3D file
<</Type /Filespec
/F (3D.prc)
/UF (3D.prc)
/EF <</F 40 0 R>>                                    % Stream containing the 3D file
>>
endobj
40 0 obj                                                   % Embedded file stream for 3D file
<< /Type /EmbeddedFile                                  % 3D.prc
/Length …
/Filter …
>>
stream
… Data for 3D.prc …
endstream
endobj
13.7.2.3.3     RichMediaConfiguration dictionary
The RichMediaConfiguration dictionary describes a set of instances that are loaded for a given scene
configuration. The configuration that shall be loaded when an annotation is activated is referenced by
the Configuration key in the RichMediaActivation dictionary specified in the RichMediaSettings
dictionary. "Table 342 — Entries in a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary" details the elements of the
RichMediaConfiguration dictionary.
Table 342 — Entries in a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary
Key           Type           Value
Type          name           (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes. If present, it
shall be RichMediaConfiguration.
Subtype       name           (Optional; PDF 2.0) A name specifying the primary content type for the
configuration. Valid values are 3D, Sound, and Video.
Default value: If no value is specified, the run time shall determines the scene type
by referring to the type of asset file specified by the first element in the Instances
array.
Name          text string    (Optional; PDF 2.0) A unique name for the configuration.
Instances     array          (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array of indirect object references to RichMediaInstance
dictionaries. (See "Table 343 — Entries in a RichMediaInstance dictionary".)
A RichMediaConfiguration may be an aggregate of several RichMediaInstance dictionaries with
different values for subtype. The Subtype entry helps to describe the behavior for the collection of
those RichMediaInstance dictionaries.
Setting the Subtype suggests the author’s intended use of the assets, which better informs the choices
when presenting content-specific user interfaces during the authoring or editing process.
13.7.2.3.4     RichMediaInstance dictionary
The RichMediaInstance dictionary, referenced by the Instances entry of the RichMediaConfiguration
dictionary ("Table 342 — Entries in a RichMediaConfiguration dictionary"), describes a single instance
of an asset with settings to populate the artwork of an annotation, as described in "Table 343 —
Entries in a RichMediaInstance dictionary".
710                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 343 — Entries in a RichMediaInstance dictionary
Key            Type          Value
Type           name          (Optional; PDF 2.0) The type of PDF object that this dictionary
describes. If present, it shall be RichMediaInstance.
Subtype        name          (Required; PDF 2.0) A name specifying the content type for the instance.
Valid values are 3D, Sound, and Video. The subtype shall match the
asset file type of the instance.
Asset          dictionary    (Required; PDF 2.0) A dictionary that shall be an indirect object
reference to a file specification dictionary that is also referenced in the
Assets name tree specified in the RichMediaContent dictionary of the
annotation.
EXAMPLE 1         RichMediaInstance dictionaries
15 0 obj                                       %RichMediaInstances array
[16 0 R
… more references to RichMediaInstance dictionaries …
]
endobj
16 0 obj                                                   %RichMediaInstance dictionary
<</Type /RichMediaInstance
/Subtype /3D
/Asset 30 0 R                                        %Reference to 3D filespec in Assets
>>
endobj
13.7.2.3.5        View dictionary
View dictionaries specify a unique view of the artwork that may be used when the annotation is
activated or selected. A View dictionary entry in a rich media annotation contains a superset of the
information present in a 3D view (3DV) dictionary as specified in "Table 315 — Entries in a 3D view
dictionary". "Table 344 — Additional entries in a 3D view dictionary" describes the entries in addition
to those present within a 3D view dictionary.
Table 344 — Additional entries in a 3D view dictionary
Key           Type          Value
Snapshot      stream        (Optional; PDF 2.0) A stream that shall contains an image XObject (see
8.9, "Images") to be displayed when the view is invoked.
Default value: No image shall be used, the currently active rich media
content is displayed.
Params        array         (Optional; PDF 2.0) An array containing View Params dictionaries (see
13.7.2.3.6, "View params dictionary").
Default value: an empty array.
NOTE     (2020) The Params key was accidently omitted from earlier PDF 2.0
specifications and was reinstated in this document.
If the Snapshot entry exists, the image it describes shall be displayed in place of the current artwork.
Because the snapshot image should be integrated by the player with other elements, such as user
interface controls for video playback, the colour space of the image may be modified by the interactive
PDF processor.
13.7.2.3.6      View params dictionary
13.7.2.3.6.1 General
The View Params dictionary provides a reference to a RichMediaInstance dictionary within the
Instances array, and additional Data that is passed to the instance. This data may be formatted to
serve the individual purpose of the content being referenced.
Table 345 — Entries in a View Params dictionary
Key         Type        Value
Instance    dictionary (Required; PDF 2.0) A dictionary that shall be an indirect object
reference to a RichMediaInstance dictionary that is also present in the
Instances array of the annotation.
Data        text string (Required; PDF 2.0) A text string or stream containing state data that
or stream shall be passed to the instance when the view is triggered.
The Data entry ("Table 345 — Entries in a View Params dictionary") is used to store and load opaque
data specific to the Instance referenced in the same dictionary when a View is activated.
NOTE       This system allows content-specific state information to be stored when a view is created, such
as during a comment or drawing markup.
13.7.2.3.6.2 Saving state data
When the View is created, the run time shall iterate through all active instances for the current
configuration and query them for state data. For 3D content, an ECMAScript StateEvent is invoked with
the type property set to the value save. After the event is handled, the value for the data property, if it
is present and can be interpreted as a string, shall be stored as the value for Data.
13.7.2.3.6.3 Loading state data
When the View is activated, the run time shall iterate through each View Params dictionary and load
the state data for each instance referenced. For 3D content, an ECMAScript StateEvent is invoked with
the type property set to the value load and the data property set to the value stored for Data.
712                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
