7.10 Functions
7.10.1              General
PDF is not a programming language, and a PDF file is not a program. However, PDF provides several
types of function objects (PDF 1.2) that represent parameterised classes of functions, including
mathematical formulas and sampled representations with arbitrary resolution.
NOTE 1      Functions can be used in various ways in PDF, including device-dependent rasterization
information for high-quality printing (halftone spot functions and transfer functions), colour
transform functions for certain colour spaces, and specification of colours as a function of
position for smooth shadings.
Functions in PDF represent static, self-contained numerical transformations.
NOTE 2      A function to add two numbers has two input values and one output value:
𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑥1 ) = 𝑥0 + 𝑥1
Similarly, a function that computes the arithmetic and geometric mean of two numbers can be viewed
as a function of two input values and two output values:
𝑥0 + 𝑥1
𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑥1 ) =           , √𝑥0 × 𝑥1
In general, a function can take any number (m) of input values and produce any number (n) of output
values:
𝑓(𝑥0 , … , 𝑥𝑚−1 ) = 𝑦0 , … , 𝑦𝑛−1
In PDF functions, all the input values and all the output values shall be numbers, and functions shall
have no side effects.
Each function definition includes a domain, the set of valid values for the input. Some types of functions
also define a range, the set of valid values for the output. Input values passed to the function shall be
clipped to the domain, and output values produced by the function shall be clipped to the range.
EXAMPLE             Suppose the following function is defined with a domain of [-1 1]. If the function is called with the input value
6, that value is replaced with the nearest value in the defined domain, 1, before the function is evaluated; the
resulting output value is therefore 3.
𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑥 + 2
Similarly, if the following function is defined with a range of [0 100], and if the input values -6 and 4 are
passed to the function (and are within its domain), then the output value produced by the function, -14,
is replaced with 0, the nearest value in the defined range.
𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑥1 ) = 3 × 𝑥0 + 𝑥1
A function object may be a dictionary or a stream, depending on the type of function. The term function
dictionary is used generically in this subclause to refer to either a dictionary object or the dictionary
portion of a stream object. A function dictionary specifies the function’s representation, the set of
attributes that parameterize that representation, and the additional data needed by that
representation. Four types of functions are available, as indicated by the dictionary’s FunctionType
entry:
•    (PDF 1.2) A sampled function (Type 0) uses a table of sample values to define the function. Various
techniques are used to interpolate values between the sample values; see 7.10.2, "Type 0
(sampled) functions"
•    (PDF 1.3) An exponential interpolation function (Type 2) defines a set of coefficients for an
exponential function; see 7.10.3, "Type 2 (exponential interpolation) functions"
•    (PDF 1.3) A stitching function (Type 3) is a combination of other functions, partitioned across a
domain; see 7.10.4, "Type 3 (stitching) functions"
•    (PDF 1.3) A PostScript calculator function (Type 4) uses operators from the PostScript language to
describe an arithmetic expression; see 7.10.5, "Type 4 (PostScript calculator) functions"
All function dictionaries shall share the entries listed in "Table 38 — Entries common to all function
dictionaries".
Table 38 — Entries common to all function dictionaries
Key              Type        Value
FunctionType integer         (Required) The function type:
0       Sampled function
2       Exponential interpolation function
3       Stitching function
4       PostScript calculator function
Domain           array       (Required) An array of 2 × m numbers, where m shall be the
number of input values. For each i from 0 to m - 1, Domain2i shall
be less than or equal to Domain2i+1, and the ith input value, xi, shall
lie in the interval Domain2i ≤ xi ≤ Domain2i+1 . Input values outside
the declared domain shall be clipped to the nearest boundary
value.
Range            array       (Required for Type 0 and Type 4 functions, optional otherwise; see
below) An array of 2 × n numbers, where n shall be the number of
output values. For each j from 0 to n - 1, Range2j shall be less than
or equal to Range2j+1, and the jth output value, yj, shall lie in the
interval Range2j ≤ yj ≤ Range2j+1. Output values outside the
declared range shall be clipped to the nearest boundary value. If
this entry is absent, no clipping shall be done (subject to
implementation limits).
124                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
In addition, each type of function dictionary shall include entries appropriate to the particular function
type. The number of output values can usually be inferred from other attributes of the function; if not
(as is always the case for Type 0 and Type 4 functions), the Range entry is required. The
dimensionality of the function implied by the Domain and Range entries shall be consistent with that
implied by other attributes of the function.
𝑦 = Interpolate(𝑥, 𝑥min , 𝑥max , 𝑦min , 𝑦max )
𝑦      −𝑦
= 𝑦min + ((𝑥 − 𝑥min ) × 𝑥max −𝑥min )
max    min
For a given value of x, Interpolate calculates the y value on the line defined by the two points (xmin, ymin)
and (xmax, ymax).
7.10.2            Type 0 (sampled) functions
Type 0 functions use a sequence of sample values (contained in a stream) to provide an approximation
for functions whose domains and ranges are bounded. The samples are organised as an m-dimensional
table in which each entry has n components.
NOTE 1      Sampled functions are highly general and offer reasonably accurate representations of arbitrary
analytic functions at low expense. For example, a 1-input sinusoidal function can be represented
over the range [0 180] with an average error of only 1 percent, using just ten samples and linear
interpolation. Two-input functions require significantly more samples but usually not a
prohibitive number if the function does not have high frequency variations.
There shall be no dimensionality limit of a sampled function except for possible implementation limits.
NOTE 2      The number of samples required to represent functions with high dimensionality multiplies
rapidly unless the sampling resolution is very low. Also, the process of multilinear interpolation
becomes computationally intensive if the number of inputs m is greater than 2. The
multidimensional spline interpolation is even more computationally intensive.
In addition to the entries in "Table 38 — Entries common to all function dictionaries", a Type 0
function dictionary includes those shown in "Table 39 — Additional entries specific to a Type 0
function dictionary".
The Domain, Encode, and Size entries determine how the function’s input variable values are mapped
into the sample table. For example, if Size is [21 31], the default Encode array shall be [0 20 0 30],
which maps the entire domain into the full set of sample table entries. Other values of Encode may be
used.
The interpolate function (7.10.1, "General") explains the relationship between Domain, Encode, Size,
Decode, and Range.
Table 39 — Additional entries specific to a Type 0 function dictionary
Key                 Type         Value
Size                array        (Required) An array of m positive integers that shall specify the number of
samples in each input dimension of the sample table.
Key               Type        Value
BitsPerSample     integer     (Required) The number of bits that shall represent each sample. (If the
function has multiple output values, each one shall occupy BitsPerSample
bits.) Valid values shall be 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 24, and 32.
Order             integer     (Optional) The order of interpolation between samples. Valid values shall be
1 and 3, specifying linear and cubic spline interpolation, respectively. Default
value: 1.
Encode            array       (Optional) An array of 2 × m numbers specifying the linear mapping of input
values into the domain of the function’s sample table. Default value: [0 (Size0
-1) 0 (Size1 - 1)…].
Decode            array       (Optional) An array of 2 × n numbers specifying the linear mapping of sample
values into the range appropriate for the function’s output values. Default
value: same as the value of Range.
other stream      (various) (Optional) Other attributes of the stream that shall provide the sample values,
attributes                  as appropriate (see "Table 5 — Entries common to all stream dictionaries").
When a sampled function is called, each input value xi, for 0 ≤ i < m, shall be clipped to the domain:
xi′ = min(max (xi , Domain2i ), Domain2i+1 )
That value shall be encoded:
ei = Interpolate (xi′ , Domain2i , Domain2i+1 , Encode2i , Encode2i+1 )
That value shall be clipped to the size of the sample table in that dimension:
e′i = min (max(ei , 0), Sizei − 1)
The encoded input values shall be real numbers, not restricted to integers. Interpolation shall be used
to determine output values from the nearest surrounding values in the sample table. Each output value
rj, for 0 ≤ j < n, shall then be decoded:
rj′ = Interpolate (rj , 0, 2BitsPerSample − 1, Decode2j , Decode2j+1 )
Finally, each decoded value shall be clipped to the range:
yj = min(max (rj′ , Range2j ), Range2j+1 )
Sample data shall be represented as a stream of bytes. The bytes shall constitute a continuous bit
stream, with the high-order bit of each byte first. Each sample value shall be represented as a sequence
of BitsPerSample bits. Successive values shall be adjacent in the bit stream; there shall be no padding
at byte boundaries.
For a function with multidimensional input (more than one input variable), the sample values in the
first dimension vary fastest, and the values in the last dimension vary slowest.
126                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
EXAMPLE 1         For a function f(a, b, c), where a, b, and c vary from 0 to 9 in steps of 1, the sample values would appear in
this order: f(0, 0, 0), f(1, 0, 0),…, f(9, 0, 0), f(0, 1, 0), f(1, 1, 0),…, f(9, 1, 0), f(0, 2, 0), f(1, 2, 0),…, f(9, 9, 0), f(0,
0, 1), f(1, 0, 1), and so on.
For a function with multidimensional output (more than one output value), the values shall be stored
in the same order as Range.
The stream data shall be long enough to contain the entire sample array, as indicated by Size, Range,
and BitsPerSample; see 7.3.8.2, "Stream extent".
Example 2 illustrates a sampled function with 4-bit samples in an array containing 21 columns and 31
rows (651 values). The function takes two arguments, x and y, in the domain [-1.0 1.0], and returns one
value, z, in that same range. The x argument shall be linearly transformed by the encoding to the
domain [0 20] and the y argument to the domain [0 30]. Using bilinear interpolation between sample
points, the function computes a value for z, which (because BitsPerSample is 4) will be in the range [0
15], and the decoding transforms z to a number in the range [-1.0 1.0] for the result. The sample array
shall be stored in a string of 326 bytes, calculated as follows (rounded up):
326 bytes = 31 rows × 21 samples /row × 4 bits /sample ÷ 8 bits /byte
The first byte contains the sample for the point (-1.0, -1.0) in the high-order 4 bits and the sample for
the point (-0.9, -1.0) in the low-order 4 bits.
EXAMPLE 2
14 0 obj
<</FunctionType 0
/Domain [-1.0 1.0 -1.0 1.0]
/Size [21 31]
/Encode [0 20 0 30]
/BitsPerSample 4
/Range [-1.0 1.0]
/Decode [-1.0 1.0]
/Length …
/Filter…
>>
stream
…651 sample values…
endstream
endobj
NOTE 3      The Decode entry can be used creatively to increase the accuracy of encoded samples
corresponding to certain values in the range.
EXAMPLE 3         If the range of the function is [-1.0 1.0] and BitsPerSample is 4, the usual value of Decode would be [-1.0
1.0] and the sample values would be integers in the interval [0 15] (as shown in "Figure 8 — Mapping with
the Decode array"). But if these values are used, the midpoint of the range, 0.0, is not represented exactly by
any sample value, since it falls halfway between 7 and 8. However, if the Decode array is [-1.0 +1.1429]
(1.1429 being approximately equal to 16 ÷ 14) and the sample values supplied are in the interval [0 14], the
effective range of [-1.0 1.0] is achieved, and the range value 0.0 is represented by the sample value 7.
Figure 8 — Mapping with the Decode array
The Size value for an input dimension can be 1, in which case all input values in that dimension shall be
mapped to the single allowed value. If Size is less than 4, cubic spline interpolation is not possible and
Order 3 shall be ignored if specified.
7.10.3          Type 2 (exponential interpolation) functions
Type 2 functions (PDF 1.3) include a set of parameters that define an exponential interpolation of one
input value and n output values:
𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑦0 , … , 𝑦𝑛−1
In addition to the entries in "Table 38 — Entries common to all function dictionaries", a Type 2
function dictionary shall include those listed in "Table 40 — Additional entries specific to a Type 2
function dictionary".
Table 40 — Additional entries specific to a Type 2 function dictionary
Key      Type        Value
C0       array       (Optional) An array of n numbers that shall define the function result when
𝑥 = 0.0. Default value: [0.0].
C1       array       (Optional) An array of n numbers that shall define the function result when
𝑥 = 1.0. Default value: [1.0].
N        number      (Required) The interpolation exponent. Each input value x shall return n
values, given by yj = C0j + x N × (C1j − C0j ), for 0 ≤ j < n .    24T
Values of Domain shall constrain x in such a way that if N is not an integer, all values of x will be non-
negative, and if N is negative, no value of x will be zero. Typically, Domain is declared as [0.0 1.0], and
N is a positive number. To clip the output to a specified range the Range attribute shall be used.
NOTE        When N is 1, the function performs a linear interpolation between C0 and C1; therefore, the
function can also be expressed as a sampled function (Type 0).
7.10.4          Type 3 (stitching) functions
Type 3 functions (PDF 1.3) define a stitching of the subdomains of several 1-input functions to produce
128                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
a single new 1-input function. Since the resulting stitching function is a 1-input function, the domain is
given by a two-element array, [Domain0 Domain1].
In addition to the entries in "Table 38 — Entries common to all function dictionaries", a Type 3
function dictionary shall include those listed in "Table 41 — Additional entries specific to a Type 3
function dictionary".
Table 41 — Additional entries specific to a Type 3 function dictionary
Key         Type Value
Functions array (Required) An array of k, 1-input functions that shall make up the stitching function.
The output dimensionality of all functions shall be the same, and compatible with the
value of Range if Range is present.
Bounds      array (Required) An array of 𝑘 − 1 numbers that, in combination with Domain, shall define
the intervals to which each function from the Functions array shall apply. Bounds
elements shall be in order of increasing value, and each value shall be within the
domain defined by Domain.
Encode      array (Required) An array of 2 × 𝑘 numbers that, taken in pairs, shall map each subset of
the domain defined by Domain and the Bounds array to the domain of the
corresponding function.
Domain shall be of size 2 (that is, 𝑚 = 1), and Domain0 shall be strictly less than Domain1 unless
𝑘 = 1. The domain shall be partitioned into k subdomains, as indicated by the dictionary’s Bounds
entry, which shall be an array of 𝑘 − 1 numbers that obey the following relationships (with exceptions
as noted below):
𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 ≤ 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 < 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 < ⋯ < 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠𝑘−2 ≤ 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1
The Bounds array shall describe a series of k half-open intervals, closed on the left and open on the
right with the following exceptions:
•    the last interval, shall always be closed on the right,
•    if 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 = 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 then the first interval shall be closed on both the left and right and the
second (next) interval shall be open on the left.
EXAMPLE 1         Using the normal notation where ( and ) mean open on the left and right, respectively, and [ and ] mean close
on the left and right, the following cases are depicted:
𝑘 = 1 and 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 ≤ 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 results in one interval [𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 , 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 ].
𝑘 = 2 and 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 < 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 ≤ 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 results in two intervals [𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 , 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 );
[𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 , 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 ].
𝑘 = 2 and 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 = 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 < 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 results in two intervals [𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 , 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 ];
(𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 , 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 ].
𝑘 = 3 and 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 < 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 < 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 < 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 results in three intervals [𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 , 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 );
[𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 , 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 ); [𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 , 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 ].
𝑘 = 3 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 = 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 < 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 < 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 results in three intervals [𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛0 , 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 ];
(𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠0 , 𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 ); [𝐵𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠1 , 𝐷𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑖𝑛1 ].
The value of the Functions entry shall be an array of k functions. The first function shall apply to x
values in the first subdomain (interval), defined by Domain0 and Bounds0 as defined just above; the
second function shall apply to x values in the second subdomain, defined by Bounds0 and Bounds1;
and so on. The last function shall apply to x values in the last subdomain, which includes the upper
bound defined by Boundsk-2 and Domain1. The value of k may be 1, in which case the Bounds array
shall be empty and the single item in the Functions array shall apply to all x values, Domain0 ≤ x ≤
Domain1.
The Encode array contains 2 × 𝑘 numbers. A value x from the ith subdomain shall be encoded as
follows:
x ′ = Interpolate(x, Boundsi−1 , Boundsi , Encode2i , Encode2i+1 )
for 0 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑘. In this equation, Bounds-1 means Domain0, and Boundsk-1 means Domain1. If the last
bound, Boundsk-2, is equal to Domain1, then x′ shall be defined to be Encode2(k-1). For the degenerate
case, if the first bound, Bounds0, is equal to Domain0 then x′ shall be defined to be Encode0.
NOTE        The stitching function is designed to make it easy to combine several functions to be used within
one shading pattern over different parts of the shading’s domain. Shading patterns are discussed
in 8.7.4, "Shading patterns". The same effect could be achieved by creating a separate shading
dictionary for each of the functions, with adjacent domains. However, since each shading would
have similar parameters, and because the overall effect is one shading, it is more convenient to
have a single shading with multiple function definitions. Also, Type 3 functions provide a general
mechanism for inverting the domains of 1-input functions.
EXAMPLE 2       Consider a function f with a Domain of [0.0 1.0] and a stitching function g with a Domain of [0.0 1.0], a
Functions array containing f, and an Encode array of [1.0 0.0]. In effect, 𝑔 (𝑥) = 𝑓 (1 − 𝑥).
7.10.5           Type 4 (PostScript calculator) functions
7.10.5.1         General
A Type 4 function (PDF 1.3), also called a PostScript calculator function, shall be represented as a
stream containing code written in a small subset of the PostScript language. This subset is comprised
of the following PostScript language features:
•    Expressions involving only integers, real numbers, and boolean values
•    Comments
•    No composite data structures (such as strings or arrays)
•    No procedures
•    No variables or names
NOTE 1      Although any function can be sampled (in a Type 4 PDF function) and others can be described
with exponential functions (Type 2 in PDF), Type 4 functions offer greater flexibility and
potentially greater accuracy. For example, a tint transformation function for a hexachrome (six-
component) DeviceN colour space with an alternative colour space of DeviceCMYK (see 8.6.6.5,
"DeviceN colour spaces") requires a 6-in, 4-out function. If such a function were sampled with m
values for each input variable, the number of samples, 4 × m6, could be prohibitively large. In
practice, such functions can often be written as short, simple PostScript language functions.
130                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
NOTE 2      Type 4 functions also facilitate inclusion of a wide variety of halftone spot functions without the
loss of accuracy that comes from sampling, and without adding to the list of predefined spot
functions (see 10.6.3, "Spot functions"). All of the predefined spot functions can be written as
Type 4 functions.
7.10.5.2          Operators and operands
"Table 42 — Operators in Type 4 functions" lists the operators that can be used in this type of function.
The PostScript Language Reference, Third Edition shall define the semantics of these operators and all
other syntax rules of the PostScript language. Although the semantics are those of the corresponding
PostScript language operators, a full PostScript language compatible interpreter is not required.
Table 42 — Operators in Type 4 functions
Operator Type            Operators
Arithmetic                 abs          cvi          floor        mod     sin
operators
add          cvr          idiv         mul     sqrt
atan         div          ln           neg     sub
ceiling      exp          log          round   truncate
cos
Relational,                and          false        le           not     true
boolean, and
bitwise operators          bitshift     ge           lt           or      xor
eq           gt           ne
Conditional                If           ifelse
operators
Stack operators            copy         exch         pop
dup          index        roll
The operand syntax for Type 4 functions shall follow PDF conventions rather than PostScript language
conventions. The entire code stream defining the function shall be enclosed in braces { } (using LEFT
CURLY BRACE (7Bh) and RIGHT CURLY BRACE (07hD)). Braces also shall delimit expressions that are
executed conditionally by the if and ifelse operators:
•    boolean {expression} if
•    boolean {expression1} {expression2} ifelse
This construct is purely syntactic; unlike in the PostScript language, no "procedure objects" shall be
involved.
7.10.5.3          Type 4 function dictionary
A Type 4 function dictionary shall include the entries in "Table 38 — Entries common to all function
dictionaries", as well as other appropriate stream attributes (see "Table 5 — Entries common to all
stream dictionaries"). The following example shows a Type 4 function equivalent to the predefined
