7 Syntax 
7.1 General 
This clause covers everything about the syntax of a PDF file at the object, file, and document level. It 
sets the stage for subsequent clauses, which describe how the contents of a PDF file are interpreted as 
page descriptions, interactive navigational aids, and application-level logical structure. 
PDF file syntax is best understood by considering it as four parts, as shown in "Figure 1 — PDF file 
components": 
• 
Objects. A PDF file is a data structure composed from a small set of basic types of data objects. 
Subclause 7.2, "Lexical conventions" describes the character set used to write objects and other 
syntactic elements. Subclause 7.3, "Objects" describes the syntax and essential properties of the 
objects. Subclause 7.3.8, "Stream objects" provides complete details of the most complex data 
type, the stream object. Subclause 7.4, "Filters" introduces stream filters primarily used to make 
PDF files smaller by applying compression technology to stream data. 
• 
File structure. The PDF file structure determines how objects are stored in a PDF file, how they are 
accessed, and how they are updated. This structure is independent of the semantics of the objects. 
Subclause 7.5, "File structure" describes the file structure. Subclause 7.6, "Encryption" describes a 
file-level mechanism for protecting a document’s content from unauthorised access. 
• 
Document structure. The PDF file structure specifies how the basic object types are used to 
represent components of a PDF file: pages, fonts, annotations, and so forth. Subclause 7.7, 
"Document structure" describes the overall document structure; later clauses address the 
detailed semantics of the components. 
• 
Content streams. A PDF content stream contains a sequence of instructions describing the 
appearance of a page or other graphical entity. These instructions, while also represented as 
objects, are conceptually distinct from the objects that represent the document structure and are 
described separately. Subclause 7.8, "Content streams and resources" discusses PDF content 
streams and their associated resources. 
 
Figure 1 — PDF file components 
In addition, this clause describes some data structures, built from basic objects, that are so widely used 
that they can almost be considered basic object types in their own right. These objects are covered in: 
7.9, "Common data structures"; 7.10, "Functions"; and 7.11, "File specifications". Subclause 7.12, 
"Extensions dictionary" describes a dictionary used to identify developer-defined extensions to this 
document that are used in the file. 

NOTE 
Variants of PDF’s object and file syntax are also used as the basis for other file formats. These 
include the Forms Data Format (FDF), described in 12.7.8, "Forms data format", and the Portable 
Job Ticket Format (PJTF), described in Adobe Technical Note #5620, Portable Job Ticket Format. 
Annex H, "Example PDF file" presents several examples showing the structure of PDF files. 
7.2 Lexical conventions 
7.2.1 General 
At the most fundamental level, a PDF file is a sequence of bytes. These bytes can be grouped into 
tokens according to the syntax rules described in subclauses 7.2.2, “Representation” through 7.2.4, 
“Comments”. One or more tokens are assembled to form higher-level syntactic entities, principally 
objects, which are the basic data values from which a PDF file is constructed. 
A PDF file is represented as a sequence of 8-bit bytes, some of which are interpreted as character codes 
in the ASCII character set and some of which are treated as arbitrary binary data depending upon the 
context. 
The contents (data) of a string or stream object in some contexts are interpreted as character codes in 
the PDFDocEncoding, UTF-8 or UTF-16 character set as described in 7.9.2, "String object types" and 
7.3.8, "Stream objects" respectively. 
The contents of a string within a PDF content stream in some situations are interpreted as character 
codes that select glyphs to be drawn on the page according to a character encoding that is associated 
with the text font as described in clause 9, "Text". 
7.2.2 Representation 
A non-encrypted PDF file can be entirely represented using byte values corresponding to the visible 
printable subset of the ASCII character set defined in INCITS 4-1986 (R2017), plus white-space 
characters. However, a PDF file is not restricted to the ASCII character set; it may contain arbitrary 
bytes, subject to the following considerations: 
• 
The tokens that delimit objects and that describe the structure of a PDF file shall use the ASCII 
character set. In addition all the reserved words and the names used as keys in PDF standard 
dictionaries and certain types of arrays shall be defined using the ASCII character set. 
• 
The data values of strings and streams objects may be written either entirely using the ASCII 
character set or entirely in binary data. In actual practice, data that is naturally binary, such as 
sampled images, is usually represented in binary for compactness and efficiency. 
• 
A PDF file containing binary data shall be transported as a binary file rather than as a text file to 
ensure that all bytes of the file are faithfully preserved. 
NOTE 1 
A binary file is not portable to environments that impose reserved character codes, maximum 
line lengths, end-of-line conventions, or other restrictions. 
NOTE 2 
In this clause, the usage of the term character is entirely independent of any logical meaning that 
the value can have when it is treated as data in specific contexts, such as representing human-
readable text or selecting a glyph from a font. 
7.2.3 Character set 
The PDF character set is divided into three classes referred to as regular, delimiter, and white-space 

characters. This classification enables the grouping of characters into tokens including separating 
syntactic constructs such as names and numbers from each other. The rules defined in this subclause 
apply to all characters in the file except within strings, streams, and comments. 
NOTE 1 
See 7.3.4, "String objects", 7.3.8, "Stream objects" and 7.2.4, "Comments". 
PDF syntax treats any sequence of consecutive white-space characters, not inside of a string or stream, 
as one character. The characters that are considered white-space characters are shown in "Table 1 — 
White-space characters" and can be used to separate syntactic constructs such as names and numbers 
from each other. In all other contexts, PDF syntax treats any sequence of consecutive white-space 
characters as one character. 
Table 1 — White-space characters 
Decimal 
Hexadecimal 
Octal 
Name 
Null (NUL) 
HORIZONTAL TAB (HT) 
0A 
LINE FEED (LF) 
0C 
FORM FEED (FF) 
0D 
CARRIAGE RETURN (CR) 
SPACE (SP) 
 
The CARRIAGE RETURN (0Dh) and LINE FEED (0Ah) characters, also called newline characters, shall 
be treated as end-of-line (EOL) markers. The combination of a CARRIAGE RETURN followed 
immediately by a LINE FEED shall be treated as one EOL marker. EOL markers may be treated the 
same as any other white-space characters. However, sometimes an EOL marker is required — that is, 
preceding a token that shall appear at the beginning of a line. 
NOTE 2 
The examples in this document use a convention that arranges tokens into lines. However, the 
examples’ use of white-space for indentation is purely for clarity of exposition and need not be 
included in practical use. 
The delimiter characters (, ), <, >, [, ], /, and % are special (LEFT PARENTHESIS (28h), RIGHT 
PARENTHESIS (29h), LESS-THAN SIGN (3Ch), GREATER-THAN SIGN (3Eh), LEFT SQUARE BRACKET 
(5Bh), RIGHT SQUARE BRACKET (5Dh), SOLIDUS (2Fh) and PERCENT SIGN (25h), respectively). They 
delimit syntactic entities such as arrays, names, and comments. The delimiter characters { and } (LEFT 
CURLY BRACE (7Bh) and RIGHT CURLY BRACE (7Dh)) are additional delimiter characters within Type 
4 PostScript calculator functions (see 7.10.5 "Type 4 (PostScript calculator) functions"). In addition, the 
double character constructs << (3C3Ch) and >> (3E3Eh) are used to delimit dictionary objects (see 
7.3.7, "Dictionary objects"). Any of these delimiters terminates the entity preceding it and is not 
included in the entity. Delimiter characters are allowed within the scope of a string when following the 
rules for composing strings; see 7.3.4.2, "Literal strings". The leading ( of a string does delimit a 
preceding entity and the closing ) of a string delimits the string’s end. “Table 2 — Delimiter characters” 
shows the delimiter characters. 

Table 2 — Delimiter characters 
Glyph 
Decimal 
Hexadecimal 
Octal 
Name 
( 
LEFT PARENTHESIS 
) 
RIGHT PARENTHESIS 
< 
3C 
LESS-THAN SIGN 
> 
3E 
GREATER-THAN SIGN 
[ 
5B 
LEFT SQUARE BRACKET 
] 
5D 
RIGHT SQUARE BRACKET 
{ 
7B 
LEFT CURLY BRACKET 
} 
7D 
RIGHT CURLY BRACKET 
/ 
2F 
SOLIDUS 
% 
PERCENT SIGN 
 
All characters except the white-space characters and delimiters are referred to as regular characters. 
These characters include bytes that are outside the ASCII character set. A sequence of consecutive 
regular characters comprises a single token. PDF syntax is case-sensitive; corresponding uppercase 
and lowercase letters are distinct. 
7.2.4 Comments 
Any occurrence of the PERCENT SIGN (25h) outside a string or inside a content stream (see 7.8.2, 
"Content streams") introduces a comment. The comment consists of all characters after the PERCENT 
SIGN and up to but not including the end-of-the-line marker. A PDF processor should ignore comments. 
PDF processors shall treat comments as single white-space characters for the purposes of lexical 
conversion (see 7.2, "Lexical conventions"). That is, a comment separates the token preceding it from 
the one following it. 
EXAMPLE 
The PDF syntax fragment in this example is syntactically equivalent to just the tokens abc and 123. 
abc%comment (/%) blah blah blah 
 
Comments (other than the %PDF–n.m and %%EOF comments described in 7.5, "File structure") have 
no semantics defined by this document. PDF writers do not need to preserve comments. 
NOTE 1 
Using comments to communicate information to PDF processors is discouraged. The preferred 
and documented mechanism is to use PDF names (see Annex E, "Extending PDF"). 
NOTE 2 
This clause was clarified in this document (2020). 

7.3 Objects 
7.3.1 General 
PDF syntax includes nine basic types of objects: boolean values, integers, real numbers, strings, names, 
arrays, dictionaries, streams, and the null object. 
Objects may be labelled so that they can be referred to by other objects. A labelled object is called an 
indirect object (see 7.3.10, "Indirect objects"). 
Each object type, their method of creation and their proper referencing as indirect objects is described 
in 7.3.2, "Boolean objects" through 7.3.10, "Indirect objects". 
7.3.2 Boolean objects 
Boolean objects represent the logical values of true and false. They appear in PDF files using the 
keywords true and false. See 4, "Notation", for more information regarding the notation of these 
keywords throughout this document. 
7.3.3 Numeric objects 
PDF syntax provides two types of basic numeric objects: integer and real. Integer objects represent 
mathematical integers. Real objects represent mathematical real numbers. The range and precision of 
numbers may be limited by the internal representations used in the computer on which the PDF 
processor is running; Annex C, "Advice on maximising portability", gives these limits for typical 
implementations. 
An integer shall be written as one or more decimal digits optionally preceded by a sign. The value shall 
be interpreted as a signed decimal integer and shall be converted to an integer object. 
EXAMPLE 1 
Integer objects 
43445 +17 
-98
A real value shall be written as one or more decimal digits with an optional sign and a leading, trailing, 
or embedded PERIOD (2Eh) (decimal point). The value shall be interpreted as a real number and shall 
be converted to a real object. A real number shall not be present when an integer is expected. 
Wherever a real number is expected, an integer may be used instead. For example, it is not necessary 
to write the number 1.0 in real format; the integer 1 is sufficient. 
EXAMPLE 2 
Real objects 
34.5 -3.62 +123.6
4. -.002 0
A PDF writer shall not use the PostScript language syntax for numbers with non-decimal radices (such 
as 16#FFFE) or in exponential format (such as 6.02E23). 
Throughout this document, the term number refers to an object whose type can be either integer or 
real. 

7.3.4 String objects 
7.3.4.1 General 
A string object shall consist of a series of zero or more bytes. The maximum length of a string used in 
the computer on which the PDF processor is running may be subject to implementation limits; see 
Annex C, "Advice on maximising portability". 
String objects shall be written in one of the following two ways: 
• 
As a sequence of literal characters enclosed in parentheses () (using LEFT PARENTHESIS (28h) 
and RIGHT PARENTHESIS (29h)); see 7.3.4.2, "Literal strings" 
• 
As hexadecimal data enclosed in angle brackets <> (using LESS-THAN SIGN (3Ch) and GREATER-
THAN SIGN (3Eh)); see 7.3.4.3, "Hexadecimal strings" 
NOTE 
In many contexts, conventions exist for the interpretation of the contents of a string value. This 
subclause defines only the basic syntax for writing a string as a sequence of bytes; conventions 
or rules governing the contents of strings in particular contexts are described with the definition 
of those particular contexts. 
Subclause 7.9.2, "String object types" describes the encoding schemes used for the contents of string 
objects. 
7.3.4.2 Literal strings 
A literal string shall be written as an arbitrary number of characters enclosed in parentheses (LEFT 
PARENHESIS (28h) and RIGHT PARENTHESIS (29h)). Any characters may appear in a string except 
unbalanced parentheses and the backslash (REVERSE SOLIDUS (5Ch)), which shall be treated specially 
as described in this subclause. Balanced pairs of parentheses within a string require no special 
treatment. 
EXAMPLE 1 
The following are valid literal strings:  
(This is a string) 
(Strings can contain newlines 
and such.) 
(Strings can contain balanced parentheses () 
and special characters ( * ! & } ^ %and so on) .) 
(The following is an empty string .) 
() 
(It has zero (0) length.) 
 
Within a literal string, the REVERSE SOLIDUS is used as an escape character. The character 
immediately following the REVERSE SOLIDUS determines its precise interpretation as shown in "Table 
3 — Escape sequences in literal strings". If the character following the REVERSE SOLIDUS is not one of 
those shown in "Table 3 — Escape sequences in literal strings", the REVERSE SOLIDUS shall be 
ignored. 
Table 3 — Escape sequences in literal strings 
Sequence 
Meaning 
\n 
LINE FEED (0Ah) (LF) 

Sequence 
Meaning 
\r 
CARRIAGE RETURN (0Dh) (CR) 
\t 
HORIZONTAL TAB (09h) (HT) 
\b 
BACKSPACE (08h) (BS) 
\f 
FORM FEED (0Ch) (FF) 
\( 
LEFT PARENTHESIS (28h) 
\) 
RIGHT PARENTHESIS (29h) 
\\ 
REVERSE SOLIDUS (5Ch) (Backslash) 
\ddd 
Character code ddd (octal) 
 
A PDF writer may split a literal string across multiple lines. The REVERSE SOLIDUS (5Ch) (backslash 
character) at the end of a line shall be used to indicate that the string continues on the following line. A 
PDF processor shall disregard the REVERSE SOLIDUS and the end-of-line marker following it when 
reading the string; the resulting string value shall be identical to that which would be read if the string 
were not split. 
EXAMPLE 2 
(These \ 
two strings \ 
are the same.) 
(These two strings are the same.) 
 
An end-of-line marker appearing within a literal string without a preceding REVERSE SOLIDUS shall be 
treated as a byte value of (0Ah), irrespective of whether the end-of-line marker was a CARRIAGE 
RETURN (0Dh), a LINE FEED (0Ah), or both. 
EXAMPLE 3 
(This string has an end-of-line at the end of it. 
) 
(So does this one.\n) 
 
The \ddd escape sequence provides a way to represent characters outside the printable ASCII 
character set. 
EXAMPLE 4 
(This string contains \245two octal characters\307.) 
 
The number ddd may consist of one, two, or three octal digits; high-order overflow shall be ignored. 
Three octal digits shall be used, with leading zeros as needed, if the next character of the string is also a 
digit. 
EXAMPLE 5  
the literal 

 
 
(\0053) 
denotes a string containing two characters, \005 (Control-E) followed by the digit 3, whereas both 
 
 
(\053) 
and 
 
 
(\53) 
denote strings containing the single character \053, a plus sign (+). 
 
Since any 8-bit value may appear in a string (with proper escaping for REVERSE SOLIDUS (backslash) 
and unbalanced PARENTHESES) this \ddd notation provides a way to specify characters outside the 
ASCII character set by using ASCII characters only. However, any 8-bit value may appear in a string, 
represented either as itself or with the \ddd notation described. 
When a document is encrypted (see 7.6, "Encryption"), all of its strings are encrypted; the encrypted 
string values contain arbitrary 8-bit values. When writing encrypted strings using the literal string 
form, the PDF writer shall follow the rules described. That is, the REVERSE SOLIDUS character shall be 
used as an escape to specify unbalanced PARENTHESES or the REVERSE SOLIDUS character itself. The 
REVERSE SOLIDUS may, but is not required, to be used to specify other, arbitrary 8-bit values. 
7.3.4.3 Hexadecimal strings 
Strings may also be written in hexadecimal form, which is useful for including arbitrary binary data in 
a PDF file. A hexadecimal string shall be written as a sequence of hexadecimal digits (0–9 and A–F or a–
f) encoded as ASCII characters and enclosed within angle brackets (using LESS-THAN SIGN (3Ch) and 
GREATER-THAN SIGN (3Eh)). 
EXAMPLE 1 
<4E6F762073686D6F7A206B6120706F702E> 
 
Each pair of hexadecimal digits defines one byte of the string. White-space characters (see “Table 1 — 
White-space characters”) shall be ignored. The empty string can be represented in a hexadecimal 
string by a LESS-THAN SIGN (3Ch) immediately followed by a GREATER-THAN SIGN (3Eh). 
If the final digit of a hexadecimal string is missing — that is, if there is an odd number of digits — the 
final digit shall be assumed to be 0. 
EXAMPLE 2 
<901FA3> 
 
is a 3-byte string consisting of the characters whose hexadecimal codes are 90, 1F, and A3, but 
 
<901FA> 
 
is a 3-byte string containing the characters whose hexadecimal codes are 90, 1F, and A0. 
 
7.3.5 Name objects 
Beginning with PDF 1.2 a name object is an atomic symbol uniquely defined by a sequence of any 
characters (8-bit values) except null (character code 0). Uniquely defined means that any two name 
objects that, after all escaping is expanded (see below), and the resulting sequences of bytes are not an 
exact binary match denote different objects. Atomic means that a name has no internal structure; 
although it is defined by a sequence of characters, those characters are not considered elements of the 

name. 
Even though a name may contain any characters except null, in order to express a name following the 
general rules for parsing PDF files, when written into a PDF file names should be encoded as described 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
When writing a name in a PDF file, a SOLIDUS (2Fh) (/) shall be used to introduce a name. The 
SOLIDUS is not part of the name but is a prefix indicating that what follows is a sequence of characters 
representing the name in the PDF file and shall follow these rules: 
a) A NUMBER SIGN (23h) (#) in a name shall be written by using its 2-digit hexadecimal code (23), 
preceded by the NUMBER SIGN. 
b) Any character in a name that is a regular character (other than NUMBER SIGN) shall be written as itself 
or by using its 2-digit hexadecimal code, preceded by the NUMBER SIGN. 
c) Any character that is not a regular character shall be written using its 2-digit hexadecimal code, 
preceded by the NUMBER SIGN only. 
NOTE 1 
There is not a unique encoding of names into the PDF file because regular characters can be 
coded in either of two ways. 
No token delimiter (such as white-space) occurs between the SOLIDUS and the encoded name. White-
space used as part of a name shall always be coded using the 2-digit hexadecimal notation. 
Regular characters that are outside the range EXCLAMATION MARK(21h) (!) to TILDE (7Eh) (~) 
should be written using the hexadecimal notation. 
The token SOLIDUS (a slash followed by no regular characters) introduces a unique valid name defined 
by the empty sequence of characters. 
NOTE 2 
The examples shown in "Table 4 — Examples of literal names" and containing # are not valid 
literal names in PDF 1.0 or 1.1. 
Table 4 — Examples of literal names 
Syntax for Literal name 
Resulting Name 
/Name1 
Name1 
/ASomewhatLongerName 
ASomewhatLongerName 
/A;Name_With-Various***Characters? A;Name_With-Various***Characters? 
/1.2 
1.2 
/$$ 
$$ 
/@pattern 
@pattern 
/.notdef 
.notdef 
/Lime#20Green 
Lime Green 
/paired#28#29parentheses 
paired()parentheses 
/The_Key_of_F#23_Minor 
The_Key_of_F#_Minor 

Syntax for Literal name 
Resulting Name 
/A#42 
AB 
 
In PDF syntax, literal names shall always be introduced by the SOLIDUS character (/), unlike keywords 
such as stream, endstream, and obj. 
NOTE 3 
This document follows a typographic convention of writing names without the leading SOLIDUS 
when they appear in running text and tables. For example, Type and FullScreen denote names 
that would actually be written in a PDF file (and in code examples in this document) as /Type 
and /FullScreen. 
The maximum length of a name used in the computer on which the PDF processor is running may be 
subject to an implementation limit; see Annex C, "Advice on maximising portability". The limit applies 
to the number of characters in the name’s internal representation. For example, the name /A#20B has 
three characters (A, SPACE, B), not six. 
As stated above, name objects shall be treated as atomic within a PDF file. Ordinarily, the bytes making 
up the name are never treated as text to be presented to a human user or to an application external to a 
PDF processor. However, occasionally the need arises to treat a name object as text, such as one that 
represents a font name (see the BaseFont entry in "Table 109 — Entries in a Type 1 font dictionary"), 
a colourant name in a Separation or DeviceN colour space, or a structure type (see 14.7.3, "Structure 
types"). 
In such situations, the sequence of bytes making up the name object should be interpreted according to 
UTF-8, a variable-length byte-encoded representation of Unicode in which the printable ASCII 
characters have the same representations as in ASCII. This enables a name object to represent text 
virtually in any natural language, subject to the implementation limit on the length of a name. 
NOTE 4 
PDF syntax does not prescribe what UTF-8 sequence to choose for representing any given piece 
of externally specified text as a name object. In some cases, multiple UTF-8 sequences can 
represent the same logical text. PDF name objects are considered distinct objects if, after all 
escaping is expanded, the resulting sequences of bytes are not an exact binary match. 
7.3.6 Array objects 
An array object is a one-dimensional collection of objects arranged sequentially. Unlike arrays in many 
other computer languages, PDF arrays may be heterogeneous; that is, an array’s elements may be any 
combination of numbers, strings, dictionaries, or any other objects, including other arrays. An indirect 
reference (see 7.3.10, "Indirect objects") shall be used to refer to a stream object, and may also be used 
to refer to any other kind of object. An array may have zero elements. 
An array shall be written as a sequence of objects enclosed in SQUARE BRACKETS (using LEFT 
SQUARE BRACKET (5Bh) and RIGHT SQUARE BRACKET (5Dh)). 
EXAMPLE 
 
[549 3.14 false (Ralph) /SomeName] 
 
PDF syntax directly supports only one-dimensional arrays. Arrays of higher dimension can be 
constructed by using arrays as elements of arrays, nested to any depth. 

7.3.7 Dictionary objects 
A dictionary object is an associative table containing pairs of objects, known as the dictionary’s entries. 
The first element of each entry is the key and the second element is the value. The key shall be a name 
(unlike dictionary keys in the PostScript language, which may be objects of any type). All keys shall be 
direct objects. The value may be any kind of object, including another dictionary. An indirect reference 
(see 7.3.10, "Indirect objects") shall be used as the value to refer to a stream object, and may also be 
used to refer to any other kind of object. A dictionary entry whose value is null (see 7.3.9, "Null 
object") shall be treated the same as if the entry does not exist. (This differs from the PostScript 
language, where null behaves like any other object as the value of a dictionary entry.) The maximum 
number of entries in a dictionary used in the computer on which the PDF processor is running may be 
subject to implementation limits; see Annex C, "Advice on maximising portability". A dictionary may 
have zero entries. 
NOTE 1 
The statement requiring dictionary keys to always be direct objects was added in this document 
(2020). 
The entries in a dictionary represent an associative table and as such shall be unordered even though 
an arbitrary order may be imposed upon them when written in a file. That ordering shall be ignored. 
Multiple entries in the same dictionary shall not have the same key. 
A dictionary shall be written as a sequence of key-value pairs enclosed in double angle brackets 
(<<…>>) (using LESS-THAN SIGNs (3Ch) and GREATER-THAN SIGNs (3Eh)). 
EXAMPLE 
<</Type /Example 
 
 
 
/Subtype /DictionaryExample 
 
 
 
/Version 0.01 
 
 
 
/IntegerItem 12 
 
 
 
/StringItem (a string) 
 
 
 
/Subdictionary << 
 
 
 
 
 
/Item1 0.4 
 
 
 
 
 
/Item2 true 
 
 
 
 
 
/LastItem (not !) 
 
 
 
 
 
/VeryLastItem (OK) 
 
 
 
 
 
>> 
>> 
NOTE 2 
Do not confuse the double angle brackets with single angle brackets (< and >) (using LESS-THAN 
SIGN (3Ch) and GREATER-THAN SIGN (3Eh)), which delimit a hexadecimal string (see 7.3.4.3, 
"Hexadecimal strings"). 
Dictionary objects are the main building blocks of a PDF file. They are commonly used to collect and tie 
together the attributes of a complex object, such as a font or a page of the document, with each entry in 
the dictionary specifying the name and value of an attribute. By convention, the Type entry of such a 
dictionary, if present, identifies the type of object the dictionary describes. In some cases, a Subtype 
entry (sometimes abbreviated S) may be used to further identify a specialised subcategory of the 
general type. The value of the Type or Subtype entry shall always be a name. For example, in a font 
dictionary, the value of the Type entry shall always be Font, whereas that of the Subtype entry may be 
Type1, TrueType, or one of several other values. 
The value of the Type entry can almost always be inferred from context. The value of an entry in a 
page's font resource dictionary, for example, shall be a font object; therefore, the Type entry in a font 

dictionary serves primarily as documentation and as information for error checking. The Type entry 
shall not be required unless so stated in its description; however, if the entry is present, it shall have 
the correct value. In addition, the value of the Type entry in any dictionary, even in private data, shall 
be either a name defined in this document or a registered name; see Annex E, "Extending PDF", for 
details. 
7.3.8 Stream objects 
7.3.8.1 General 
A stream object, like a string object, is a sequence of bytes. Furthermore, a stream may be of unlimited 
length, whereas a string shall be subject to an implementation limit. For this reason, objects with 
potentially large amounts of data, such as images and page descriptions, shall be represented as 
streams. 
NOTE 1 
This subclause describes only the syntax for writing a stream as a sequence of bytes. The context 
in which a stream is referenced determines what the sequence of bytes represents. 
A stream shall consist of a dictionary followed by zero or more bytes bracketed between the keywords 
stream (followed by newline) and endstream: 
dictionary 
stream 
…Zero or more bytes… 
endstream 
 
All streams shall be indirect objects (see 7.3.10, "Indirect objects") and the stream dictionary shall be a 
direct object. The keyword stream that follows the stream dictionary shall be followed by an end-of-
line marker consisting of either a CARRIAGE RETURN and a LINE FEED or just a LINE FEED, and not by 
a CARRIAGE RETURN alone. The sequence of bytes that make up a stream lie between the end-of-line 
marker following the stream keyword and the endstream keyword; the stream dictionary specifies 
the exact number of bytes. There should be an end-of-line marker after the data and before 
endstream; this marker shall not be included in the stream length. There shall not be any extra bytes, 
other than white-space, between endstream and endobj. 
NOTE 2 
Without the restriction against following the keyword stream by a CARRIAGE RETURN alone, 
differentiating a stream that uses CARRIAGE RETURN as its end-of-line marker and has a LINE 
FEED as its first byte of data from one that uses a CARRIAGE RETURN–LINE FEED sequence to 
denote end-of-line is not possible. 
Alternatively, beginning with PDF 1.2, the bytes may be contained in an external file, in which case the 
stream dictionary specifies the file, and any bytes between stream and endstream shall be ignored by 
a PDF processor. 
"Table 5 — Entries common to all stream dictionaries" lists the entries common to all stream 
dictionaries; certain types of streams may have additional dictionary entries, as indicated where those 
streams are described. The optional entries regarding filters for the stream indicate whether and how 
the data in the stream shall be transformed (decoded) before it is used. Filters are described further in 
7.4, "Filters". 
7.3.8.2 Stream extent 
Every stream dictionary shall have a Length entry that indicates how many bytes of the PDF file are 

used for the stream’s data. (If the stream has a filter, Length shall be the number of bytes of encoded 
data.) In addition, most filters are defined so that the data shall be self-limiting; that is, they use an 
encoding scheme in which an explicit end-of-data (EOD) marker delimits the extent of the data. Finally, 
streams are used to represent many objects from whose attributes a length can be inferred. All of these 
constraints shall be consistent. 
EXAMPLE 
An image with 10 rows and 20 columns, using a single colour component and 8 bits per component, requires 
exactly 200 bytes of image data. If the stream uses a filter, there needs to be enough bytes of encoded data 
in the PDF file to produce those 200 bytes. An error occurs if Length is too small, if an explicit EOD marker 
occurs too soon, or if the decoded data does not contain 200 bytes. 
Streams shall also not contain too much data, with the exception that there may be an extra end-of-line 
marker in the PDF file before the keyword endstream. 
Table 5 — Entries common to all stream dictionaries 
Key 
Type 
Value 
Length 
integer 
(Required) The number of bytes from the beginning of the line following the 
keyword stream to the last byte just before the keyword endstream. (There 
may be an additional EOL marker, preceding endstream, that is not included 
in the count and is not logically part of the stream data.) See 7.3.8.2, "Stream 
extent", for further discussion. 
Filter 
name or 
array 
(Optional) The name, or an array of zero, one or several names, of filter(s) 
that shall be applied in processing the stream data found between the 
keywords stream and endstream. Multiple filters shall be specified in the 
order in which they are to be applied. 
NOTE 
It is not recommended to include the same filter more than once in a Filter 
array. 
DecodeParms 
dictionary 
or array 
(Optional) A parameter dictionary or an array of such dictionaries, used by 
the filters specified by Filter, respectively. If there is only one filter and that 
filter has parameters, DecodeParms shall be set to the filter’s parameter 
dictionary unless all the filter’s parameters have their default values, in 
which case the DecodeParms entry may be omitted. If there are multiple 
filters and any of the filters has parameters set to nondefault values, 
DecodeParms shall be an array with one entry for each filter in the same 
order as the Filter array: either the parameter dictionary for that filter, or 
the null object if that filter has no parameters (or if all of its parameters have 
their default values). If none of the filters have parameters, or if all their 
parameters have default values, the DecodeParms entry may be omitted. 
F 
file 
specification 
(Optional; PDF 1.2) The file containing the stream data. If this entry is 
present, the bytes between stream and endstream shall be ignored. 
However, the Length entry should still specify the number of those bytes 
(usually, there are no bytes and Length is 0). The filters that are applied to 
the file data shall be specified by FFilter and the filter parameters shall be 
specified by FDecodeParms. 
FFilter 
name or 
array 
(Optional; PDF 1.2) The name of a filter to be applied in processing the data 
found in the stream’s external file, or an array of zero, one or several such 
names. The same rules apply as for Filter. 

Key 
Type 
Value 
FDecodeParms dictionary 
or array 
(Optional; PDF 1.2) A parameter dictionary, or an array of such dictionaries, 
used by the filters specified by FFilter, respectively. The same rules apply as 
for DecodeParms. 
DL 
integer 
(Optional; PDF 1.5) A non-negative integer representing the number of bytes 
in the decoded (defiltered) stream. This value is only a hint; for some stream 
filters, it may not be possible to determine this value precisely. 
 
7.3.9 Null object 
The null object has a type and value that are unequal to those of any other object. There shall be only 
one object of type null, denoted by the keyword null. An indirect object reference (see 7.3.10, "Indirect 
objects") to a nonexistent object shall be treated the same as a null object. Specifying the null object as 
the value of a dictionary entry (7.3.7, "Dictionary objects") shall be equivalent to omitting the entry 
entirely. 
7.3.10 Indirect objects 
Any object in a PDF file may be labelled as an indirect object. This gives the object a unique object 
identifier by which other objects can refer to it (for example, as an element of an array or as the value 
of a dictionary entry). The object identifier shall consist of two parts: 
• 
A positive integer object number. Indirect objects may be numbered sequentially within a PDF 
file, but this is not required; object numbers may be assigned in any arbitrary order. 
• 
A non-negative integer generation number. In a newly created file, all indirect objects shall have 
generation numbers of 0. Non-zero generation numbers may be introduced when the file is later 
updated; see 7.5.4, "Cross-reference table" and 7.5.6, "Incremental updates" 
Together, the combination of an object number and a generation number shall uniquely identify an 
indirect object. 
The definition of an indirect object in a PDF file shall consist of its object number and generation 
number (separated by white-space), followed by the value of the object bracketed between the 
keywords obj and endobj. 
EXAMPLE 1 
Indirect object definition 
12 0 obj 
(Brillig) 
endobj 
Defines an indirect string object with an object number of 12, a generation number of 0, and the string value Brillig. 
The object may be referred to from elsewhere in the file by an indirect reference. Such indirect 
references shall consist of the object number, the generation number, and the keyword R (with white-
space separating each part): 
12 0 R 
 
