9 Text
9.1      General
This clause describes the special facilities in PDF for dealing with text — specifically, for representing
characters with glyphs from fonts. A glyph is a graphical shape and is subject to all graphical
manipulations, such as coordinate transformation. Because of the importance of text in most page
descriptions, PDF provides higher-level facilities to describe, select, and render glyphs conveniently
and efficiently.
The first subclause is a general description of how glyphs from fonts are painted on the page.
Subsequent subclauses cover these topics in detail:
Text state. A subset of the graphics state parameters pertain to text, including parameters that select
the font, scale the glyphs to an appropriate size, and accomplish other graphical effects.
Text objects and operators. The text operators specify the glyphs to be painted, represented by string
objects whose values shall be interpreted as sequences of character codes. A text object encloses a
sequence of text operators and associated parameters.
Font data structures. Font dictionaries and associated data structures provide information that a PDF
processor needs to interpret the text and position the glyphs properly. The definitions of the glyphs
themselves shall be contained in font programs, which may be embedded in the PDF file, built into a
PDF processor, or obtained from an external font program.
9.2      Organisation and use of fonts
9.2.1 General
A character is an abstract symbol, whereas a glyph is a specific graphical rendering of a character.
EXAMPLE 1         The glyphs A, A, and A are renderings of the abstract "A" character.
NOTE 1      Historically these two terms have often been used interchangeably in computer typography (as
evidenced by the names chosen for some PDF dictionary keys and PostScript language
operators), but advances in this area have made the distinction more meaningful. Consequently,
this document distinguishes between characters and glyphs, though with some residual names
which are inconsistent.
Glyphs are organised into fonts. A font defines glyphs for a particular character set.
EXAMPLE 2         The Helvetica and Times fonts define glyphs for a set of standard Latin characters.
A font for use with a PDF processor is prepared in the form of a program. Such a font program shall be
written in a special-purpose language, such as the Type 1, TrueType™, or OpenType® font format, that is
understood by a specialised font interpreter.
In PDF, the term font refers to a font dictionary, a PDF object that identifies the font program and
contains additional information about it. There are several different font types, identified by the
Subtype entry of the font dictionary.
For most font types, the font program shall be defined in a separate font program, which may be either
embedded in a PDF stream object or obtained from an external source. The font program contains
glyph descriptions that generate glyphs.
NOTE 2      It is important to carefully distinguish among: 1) PDF objects that compose the PDF structure
flowing from a PDF font dictionary, 2) actual font files that can be external to the PDF or
embedded in the PDF as a PDF stream object, and 3) terminology used to distinguish varying
font and glyph technologies. For example, TrueType is a valid value of the Subtype key in a font
dictionary, but is also the name used for a glyph technology and the name used for font programs
employing that technology. It is often the case that select material from a font file is extracted
and used to populate various PDF data structures and the terminology will shift from what is
used for font file formats to what is used for the PDF objects.
PDF supports 3 different graphic representations for the shapes of glyphs which have come to be
called: Type 1, TrueType and CFF (a compact representation derived from Type 1). Further
complicating this, TrueType fonts contain TrueType glyph descriptions, Type 1 fonts contain Type 1
glyph descriptions and OpenType fonts can contain either TrueType glyph descriptions or CFF glyph
descriptions. So the term TrueType can be used to distinguish a font file format, the glyph descriptions
found in those files, the glyph descriptions found in some OpenType format fonts and the value of the
Subtype key in a font dictionary. "Table 108 — Font types" provides a good summary of this
information.
In the descriptions below the discussion is about the PDF objects used to represent the font
information and the glyph technology used, so the terminology is primarily referring to PDF objects.
For example, the use of TrueType (as a glyph technology) is much more prevalent than the use of
OpenType (as a file format).
A content stream paints glyphs on the page by specifying a font dictionary and a string object that shall
be interpreted as a sequence of one or more character codes identifying glyphs in the font. This
operation is called showing the text string; the text strings drawn in this way are called show strings.
The glyph description consists of a sequence of graphics operators that produce the specific shape for
that character in this font. To render a glyph, the PDF processor executes the glyph description.
NOTE 3      Programmers who have experience with scan conversion of general shapes need not be
concerned about the amount of computation that this description seems to imply. However, this
is only the abstract behaviour of glyph descriptions and font programs, not how they are
implemented. In fact, an efficient implementation can be achieved through careful caching and
reuse of previously rendered glyphs.
9.2.2 Basics of showing text
EXAMPLE 1       This example illustrates the most straightforward use of a font. The text ABC is placed 10 inches from the
bottom of the page and 4 inches from the left edge, using 12-point Helvetica.
BT
/F13 12 Tf
288 720 Td
( ABC ) Tj
ET
The five lines of EXAMPLE 1 perform these steps:
a) Begin a text object.
294                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
b) Set the font and font size to use, installing them as parameters in the text state. In this case, the font
resource identified by the name F13 specifies the font externally known as Helvetica.
c) Specify a starting position on the page, setting parameters in the text object.
d) Paint the glyphs for a string of characters at that position.
e) End the text object.
This subclause explains these operations in more detail.
To paint glyphs, a content stream shall first identify the font to be used. The Tf operator shall specify
the name of a font resource — that is, an entry in the Font subdictionary of the current resource
dictionary. The value of that entry shall be a font dictionary. The font dictionary shall identify the font’s
externally known name, such as Helvetica, and shall supply some additional information that the PDF
processor needs to paint glyphs from that font. The font dictionary may provide the definition of the
font program itself.
NOTE 1      The font resource name presented to the Tf operator is arbitrary, as are the names for all kinds
of resources. It bears no relationship to an actual font name, such as Helvetica.
EXAMPLE 2       This Example illustrates an excerpt from the current page’s resource dictionary, which defines the font
dictionary that is referenced as F13 (see Example 1 in this subclause).
/Resources
<</Font <</F13 23 0 R>>
>>
23 0 obj
<</Type /Font
/Subtype /Type1
/BaseFont /Helvetica
>>
endobj
A font defines the glyphs at one standard size. This standard is arranged so that the nominal height of
tightly spaced lines of text is 1 unit. In the default user coordinate system, this means the standard
glyph size is 1 unit in user space, or 1 ⁄ 72 inch. Starting with PDF 1.6, the size of this unit may be
specified as greater than 1 ⁄ 72 inch by means of the UserUnit entry of the page dictionary; see "Table
31 — Entries in a page object". The standard-size font shall then be scaled to be usable. The scale factor
is specified as the second operand of the Tf operator, thereby setting the text font size parameter in the
graphics state. Example 1 in this subclause establishes the Helvetica font with a 12-unit size in the
graphics state.
Once the font has been selected and scaled, it may be used to paint glyphs. The Td operator shall adjust
the translation components of the text matrix, as described in 9.4.2, "Text-positioning operators".
When executed for the first time after BT, Td shall establish the text position in the current user
coordinate system. This determines the position on the page at which to begin painting glyphs.
The Tj operator shall take a string operand and shall paint the corresponding glyphs, using the current
font and other text-related parameters in the graphics state.
NOTE 2      The Tj operator treats each element of the string (an integer in the range 0 to 255) as a character
code (see Example 1 in this subclause).
Each byte shall select a glyph description in the font, and the glyph description shall be executed to
paint that glyph on the page. This is the behaviour of Tj for simple fonts, such as ordinary Latin text
fonts. Interpretation of the string as a sequence of character codes is more complex for composite
fonts, described in 9.7, "Composite fonts".
What these steps produce on the page is not a 12-point glyph, but rather a 12-unit glyph, where the
unit size shall be that of the text space at the time the glyphs are rendered on the page. The actual size
of the glyph is determined by the text matrix (Tm) in the text object, several text state parameters, and
the current transformation matrix (CTM) in the graphics state; see 9.4.4, "Text space details".
EXAMPLE 3      If the text space is later scaled to make the unit size 1 centimetre, painting glyphs from the same 12-unit font
generates results that are 12 centimetres high.
9.2.3 Achieving special graphical effects
Normal uses of Tj and other glyph-painting operators cause black-filled glyphs to be painted. Other
effects may be obtained by combining font operators with general graphics operators.
The colour used for painting glyphs shall be the current colour in the graphics state: either the
nonstroking colour or the stroking colour (or both), depending on the text rendering mode (see 9.3.6,
"Text rendering mode"). The default colour shall be black (in DeviceGray), but other colours may be
obtained by executing an appropriate colour-setting operator or operators (see 8.6.8, "Colour
operators") before painting the glyphs.
EXAMPLE 1      This example uses text rendering mode 0 and the g operator to fill glyphs in 50 percent gray, as shown in
"Figure 51 — Glyphs painted in 50% gray".
BT
/F13 48 Tf
20 40 Td
0 Tr
0.5 g
(ABC) Tj
ET
Figure 51 — Glyphs painted in 50% gray
Other graphical effects may be achieved by treating the glyph outline as a path instead of filling it. The
text rendering mode parameter in the graphics state specifies whether glyph outlines shall be filled,
stroked, used as a clipping boundary, or some combination of these effects. Only a subset of the
possible rendering modes applies to Type 3 fonts.
EXAMPLE 2      This example treats glyph outlines as a path to be stroked. The Tr operator sets the text rendering mode to
1 (stroke). The w operator sets the line width to 2 units in user space. Given those graphics state parameters,
the Tj operator strokes the glyph outlines with a line 2 units thick (see "Figure 52 — Glyph outlines treated
296                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
as a stroked path").
BT
/F13 48 Tf
20 38 Td
1 Tr
2 w
(ABC) Tj
ET
Figure 52 — Glyph outlines treated as a stroked path
EXAMPLE 3       This example illustrates how the glyphs’ outlines can be used as a clipping boundary. The Tr operator sets
the text rendering mode to 7 (clip), causing the subsequent Tj operator to impose the glyph outlines as the
current clipping path. All subsequent painting operations mark the page only within this path, as illustrated
in "Figure 53 — Graphics clipped by a glyph path". This state persists until an earlier clipping path is
reinstated by the Q operator.
BT
/F13 48 Tf
20 38 Td
7 Tr
(ABC) Tj
ET
… Graphics operators to draw a starburst …
Figure 53 — Graphics clipped by a glyph path
9.2.4 Glyph positioning and metrics
A glyph’s width — formally, its horizontal displacement — is the amount of space it occupies along the
baseline of a line of text that is written horizontally. In other words, it is the distance the current text
position shall move (by translating text space) when the glyph is painted.
NOTE 1      The width is distinct from the dimensions of the glyph outline.
In some fonts, the width is constant; it does not vary from glyph to glyph. Such fonts are called fixed-
pitch or monospaced. They are used mainly for typewriter-style printing. However, most fonts used for
high-quality typography associate a different width with each glyph. Such fonts are called proportional
or variable-pitch fonts. In either case, the Tj operator shall position the consecutive glyphs of a string
according to their widths.
The width information for each glyph shall be stored both in the font dictionary and in the font
program itself.
These widths shall be consistent with the actual widths given in the font program.
NOTE 2      Storing this information in the font dictionary, although redundant, enables a PDF processor to
determine glyph positioning without having to look inside the font program.
NOTE 3      Due to differences in the way that TrueType and the Widths array store width information,
there can be cases where widths are not identical between the two. TrueType stores widths in
units of 1024 or 2048 to an Em (a unit in the field of typography), equal to the currently specified
point size, however the Widths array stores widths in units of 1000 to an Em. Using real
numbers instead of integers can mitigate rounding errors caused by this difference, and is
recommended when precise character positioning is required.
NOTE 4      The operators for showing text are designed on the assumption that glyphs are ordinarily
positioned according to their standard widths. However, means are provided to vary the
positioning in certain limited ways. For example, the TJ operator enables the text position to be
adjusted between any consecutive pair of glyphs corresponding to characters in a text string.
There are graphics state parameters to adjust character and word spacing systematically.
In addition to width, a glyph has several other metrics that influence glyph positioning and painting.
For most font types, this information is largely internal to the font program and is not specified
explicitly in the PDF font dictionary. However, in a Type 3 font, all metrics are specified explicitly (see
9.6.4, "Type 3 fonts").
The glyph coordinate system is the space in which an individual character’s glyph is defined. All path
coordinates and metrics shall be interpreted in glyph space. For all font types except Type 3, the units
of glyph space are one-thousandth of a unit of text space; for a Type 3 font, the transformation from
glyph space to text space shall be defined by a font matrix specified in an explicit FontMatrix entry in
the font. "Figure 54 — Glyph metrics" shows a typical glyph outline and its metrics.
Figure 54 — Glyph metrics
The glyph origin is the point (0, 0) in the glyph coordinate system. Tj and other text-showing operators
shall position the origin of the first glyph to be painted at the origin of text space.
EXAMPLE 1       This code adjusts the origin of text space to (40, 50) in the user coordinate system and then places the origin
298                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
of the A glyph at that point:
BT
40 50 Td
(ABC) Tj
ET
The glyph displacement is the distance from the glyph’s origin to the point at which the origin of the
next glyph should normally be placed when painting the consecutive glyphs of a line of text. This
distance is a vector (called the displacement vector) in the glyph coordinate system; it has horizontal
and vertical components.
NOTE 5      Most Western writing systems, including those based on the Latin alphabet, have a positive
horizontal displacement and a zero vertical displacement. Some Asian writing systems have a
non-zero vertical displacement. In all cases, the text-showing operators transform the
displacement vector into text space and then translate text space by that amount.
The glyph bounding box shall be the smallest rectangle (oriented with the axes of the glyph coordinate
system) that just encloses the entire glyph shape. The bounding box shall be expressed in terms of its
left, bottom, right, and top coordinates relative to the glyph origin in the glyph coordinate system.
In some writing systems, text is frequently aligned in two different directions.
NOTE 6      It is common to write Japanese and Chinese glyphs either horizontally or vertically.
To handle this, a font may contain a second set of metrics for each glyph. Which set of metrics to use
shall be selected according to a writing mode, where 0 shall specify horizontal writing and 1 shall
specify vertical writing. This feature is available only for composite fonts, discussed in 9.7, "Composite
fonts".
When a glyph has two sets of metrics, each set shall specify a glyph origin and a displacement vector
for that writing mode. In vertical writing, the glyph position shall be described by a position vector
from the origin used for horizontal writing (origin 0) to the origin used for vertical writing (origin 1).
"Figure 55 — Metrics for horizontal and vertical writing modes" illustrates the metrics for the two
writing modes:
•    The left diagram illustrates the glyph metrics associated with writing mode 0, horizontal writing.
The coordinates ll and ur specify the bounding box of the glyph relative to origin 0. w0 is the
displacement vector that specifies how the text position shall be changed after the glyph is
painted in writing mode 0; its vertical component shall be 0.
•    The centre diagram illustrates writing mode 1, vertical writing. w1 shall be the displacement
vector for writing mode 1; its horizontal component shall be 0.
•    In the right diagram, v is a position vector defining the position of origin 1 relative to origin 0.
Figure 55 — Metrics for horizontal and vertical writing modes
9.3    Text state parameters and operators
9.3.1 General
The text state comprises those graphics state parameters that only affect text. There are nine
parameters in the text state (see "Table 102 — Text state parameters").
Table 102 — Text state parameters
Parameter           Description
Tc                  Character spacing
Tw                  Word spacing
Th                  Horizontal scaling
Tl                  Leading
Tf                  Text font
Tfs                 Text font size
Tmode               Text rendering mode
Trise               Text rise
Tk                  Text knockout
Except for the previously described Tf and Tfs, these parameters are discussed further in subsequent
subclauses. (As described in 9.4, "Text objects", three additional text-related parameters may occur
only within a text object: Tm, the text matrix; Tlm, the text line matrix; and Trm, the text rendering
matrix.) The values of the text state parameters shall be consulted when text is positioned and shown
(using the operators described in 9.4.2, "Text-positioning operators" and 9.4.3, "Text-showing
operators"). In particular, the spacing and scaling parameters shall be used in a computation described
in 9.4.4, "Text space details". The text state parameters may be set using the operators listed in "Table
300                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
103 — Text state operators". All text state parameters shall apply to Type 3 fonts unless otherwise
stated.
NOTE           Negative text font size is permitted.
The text knockout parameter, Tk, shall be set through the TK entry in a graphics state parameter
dictionary by using the gs operator (see 8.4.5, "Graphics state parameter dictionaries"). There is no
specific operator for setting this parameter.
The text state operators may appear outside text objects, and the values they set are retained across
text objects in a single content stream. Like other graphics state parameters, these parameters shall be
initialised to their default values at the beginning of each page.
Table 103 — Text state operators
Operands        Operator    Description
charSpace       Tc          Set the character spacing, Tc, to charSpace, which shall be a number
expressed in unscaled text space units. Character spacing shall be used by
the Tj, TJ, and ' operators. Initial value: 0.
wordSpace       Tw          Set the word spacing, Tw, to wordSpace, which shall be a number
expressed in unscaled text space units. Word spacing shall be used by the
Tj, TJ, and ' operators. Initial value: 0.
scale           Tz          Set the horizontal scaling, Th, to (scale ÷ 100). scale shall be a number
specifying the percentage of the normal width. Initial value: 100 (normal
width).
leading         TL          Set the text leading, Tl, to leading, which shall be a number expressed in
unscaled text space units. Text leading shall be used only by the T*, ', and "
operators. Initial value: 0.
font size       Tf          Set the text font, Tf, to font and the text font size, Tfs, to size. font shall be
the name of a font resource in the Font subdictionary of the current
resource dictionary; size shall be a number representing a scale factor.
There is no initial value for either font or size; they shall be specified
explicitly by using Tf before any text is shown. Zero sized text shall not
mark or clip any pixels (depending on text render mode).
render          Tr          Set the text rendering mode, Tmode, to render, which shall be an integer.
Initial value: 0.
rise            Ts          Set the text rise, Trise, to rise, which shall be a number expressed in
unscaled text space units. Initial value: 0.
Some of these parameters are expressed in unscaled text space units. This means that they shall be
specified in a coordinate system that shall be defined by the text matrix, Tm but shall not be scaled by
the font size parameter, Tfs .
9.3.2 Character spacing
The character-spacing parameter, Tc, shall be a number specified in unscaled text space units (although
it shall be subject to scaling by the Th parameter if the writing mode is horizontal). When the glyph for
each character in the string is rendered, Tc shall be added to the horizontal or vertical component of the
glyph’s displacement, depending on the writing mode. See 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics", for a
discussion of glyph displacements. In the default coordinate system, horizontal coordinates increase
from left to right and vertical coordinates from bottom to top. Therefore, for horizontal writing, a
positive value of Tc has the effect of expanding the distance between glyphs (see "Figure 56 —
Character spacing in horizontal writing"), whereas for vertical writing, a negative value of Tc has this
effect.
Figure 56 — Character spacing in horizontal writing
9.3.3 Word spacing
Word spacing works the same way as character spacing but shall apply only to the ASCII SPACE
character (20h). The word-spacing parameter, Tw, shall be added to the glyph’s horizontal or vertical
displacement (depending on the writing mode). For horizontal writing, a positive value for Tw has the
effect of increasing the spacing between words. For vertical writing, a positive value for Tw decreases
the spacing between words (and a negative value increases it), since vertical coordinates increase from
bottom to top. "Figure 57 — Word spacing in horizontal writing" illustrates the effect of word spacing
in horizontal writing.
Figure 57 — Word spacing in horizontal writing
Word spacing shall be applied to every occurrence of the single-byte character code 32 in a string
when using a simple font (including Type 3) or a composite font that defines code 32 as a single-byte
code. It shall not apply to occurrences of the byte value 32 in multiple-byte codes.
9.3.4 Horizontal scaling           Goto errata
The horizontal scaling parameter, Th, adjusts the width of glyphs by stretching or compressing them in
the horizontal direction. Its value shall be specified as a percentage of the normal width of the glyphs,
with 100 being the normal width. The scaling shall apply to the horizontal coordinate in text space,
302                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
independently of the writing mode. It shall affect both the glyph’s shape and its horizontal
displacement (that is, its displacement vector). If the writing mode is horizontal, it shall also affect the
spacing parameters Tc and Tw, as well as any positioning adjustments performed by the TJ operator.
"Figure 58 — Horizontal scaling" shows the effect of horizontal scaling.
Goto errata
Figure 58 — Horizontal scaling
9.3.5 Leading
The leading parameter, Tl, shall be specified in unscaled text space units. It specifies the vertical
distance between the baselines of adjacent lines of text, as shown in "Figure 59 — Leading".
Figure 59 — Leading
The leading parameter shall be used by the TD, T*, ', and " operators; see "Table 106 — Text-
positioning operators" for a precise description of its effects. This parameter shall apply to the vertical
coordinate in text space, independently of the writing mode.
9.3.6 Text rendering mode
The text rendering mode, Tmode, determines whether showing text shall cause glyph outlines to be
stroked, filled, used as a clipping boundary, or some combination of the three. Stroking, filling, and
clipping shall have the same effects for a text object as they do for a path object (see 8.5.3, "Path-
painting operators" and 8.5.4, "Clipping path operators"), although they are specified in an entirely
different way. The graphics state parameters affecting those operations, such as line width, shall be
interpreted in user space rather than in text space.
NOTE 1      The text rendering modes are shown in "Table 104 — Text rendering modes". In the examples, a
stroke colour of black and a fill colour of light gray are used. For the clipping modes (4 to 7), a
series of lines has been drawn through the glyphs to show where the clipping occurs.
If the text rendering mode calls for filling, the current nonstroking colour in the graphics state shall be
used; if it calls for stroking, the current stroking colour shall be used. In modes that perform both filling
and stroking, the effect shall be as if each glyph outline were filled and then stroked in separate
operations. If any of the glyphs overlap, the result shall be equivalent to filling and stroking them one at
a time, producing the appearance of stacked opaque glyphs, rather than first filling and then stroking
them all at once. In the transparent imaging model, these combined filling and stroking modes shall be
subject to further considerations; see 11.7.4.4, "Special path-painting considerations".
The behaviour of the clipping modes requires further explanation. Glyph outlines shall begin
accumulating if a BT operator is executed while the text rendering mode is set to a clipping mode or if
it is set to a clipping mode within a text object. Glyphs shall accumulate until the text object is ended by
an ET operator; the text rendering mode shall not be changed back to a nonclipping mode before that
point.
Table 104 — Text rendering modes
Mode         Example             Description
0                                Fill text.
1                                Stroke text.
2                                Fill, then stroke text.
3                                Neither fill nor stroke text (invisible).
4                                Fill text and add to path for clipping.
5                                Stroke text and add to path for clipping.
6                                Fill, then stroke text and add to path for
clipping.
7                                Add text to path for clipping.
At the end of the text object identified by the ET operator the accumulated glyph outlines, if any, shall
be combined into a single path, treating the individual outlines as subpaths of that path and applying
the non-zero winding number rule (see 8.5.3.3.2, "Non-zero winding number rule"). The current
clipping path in the graphics state shall be set to the intersection of this path with the previous clipping
path. As is the case for path objects, this clipping shall occur after all filling and stroking operations for
the text object have occurred. It remains in effect until a previous clipping path is restored by an
invocation of the Q operator.
NOTE 2     Due to the use of non-zero winding number rule, the direction of the paths comprising each
glyph can cause different output for overlapping glyphs.
If no glyphs are shown or if the only glyphs shown have no outlines (for example, if they are ASCII
SPACE characters (20h)), no clipping shall occur.
304                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
NOTE 3      Certain degenerate glyph sub-paths that are not visible when filled can become apparent when
stroking, e.g., a zero line with round end caps will paint a circle according to the current stroke
width.
The e and f components of Tm shall be updated for each glyph drawn when using text rendering mode
3 or 7 in exactly the same way as would be done for other text rendering modes.
Where text is drawn using a Type 3 font:
•    if text rendering mode is set to a value of 3 or 7, the text shall not be rendered.
•    if text rendering mode is set to a value other than 3 or 7, the text shall be rendered using the glyph
descriptions in the Type 3 font.
•    If text rendering mode is set to a value of 4, 5, 6 or 7, nothing shall be added to the clipping path.
9.3.7 Text rise
Text rise, Trise, shall specify the distance, in unscaled text space units, to move the baseline up or down
from its default location. Positive values of text rise shall move the baseline up. "Figure 60 — Text rise"
illustrates the effect of the text rise. Text rise shall apply to the vertical coordinate in text space,
regardless of the writing mode.
NOTE        Adjustments to the baseline are useful for drawing superscripts or subscripts. The default
location of the baseline can be restored by setting the text rise to 0.
Figure 60 — Text rise
9.3.8 Text knockout
The text knockout parameter, Tk (PDF 1.4), shall be a boolean value that determines what text elements
shall be considered elementary objects for purposes of colour compositing in the transparent imaging
model. Unlike other text state parameters, there is no specific operator for setting this parameter; it
may be set only through the TK entry in a graphics state parameter dictionary by using the gs operator
(see 8.4.5, "Graphics state parameter dictionaries"). The text knockout parameter shall apply only to
entire text objects. Any TK value in a graphics state parameter dictionary installed using the gs
operator shall be ignored between the BT and ET operators delimiting a text object. The text knockout
parameter controls the behaviour of glyphs obtained from any font type, including Type 3. Its initial
value shall be true. If the parameter is false, each glyph in a text object shall be treated as a separate
elementary object; when glyphs overlap, they shall composite with one another.
If the parameter is true, the behaviour shall be equivalent to treating the entire text object as if it were
a non-isolated knockout transparency group; see 11.4.6, "Knockout groups" where each glyph is an
individual element in that group’s transparency stack. When glyphs overlap, later glyphs shall
overwrite ("knock out") earlier ones in the area of overlap. The following additional rules shall apply:
•    Graphics state parameters, including transparency parameters, shall be inherited from the
context in which the text object appears. They shall not be saved and restored. The transparency
parameters shall not be reset at the beginning of the transparency group (as they are when a
transparency group XObject is explicitly invoked). Changes made to graphics state parameters
within the text object shall persist beyond the end of the text object.
•    After the implicit transparency group for the text object has been completely evaluated, the group
results shall be composited with the backdrop, using the Normal blend mode and alpha and soft
mask values of 1.0.
NOTE        With the above listed exceptions, the compositing described in 11.4.6, "Knockout groups" applies
when the text knockout graphics parameter is true including the handling of masks.
9.4     Text objects
9.4.1 General
A PDF text object consists of operators that may show text strings, move the text position, and set text
state and certain other parameters. In addition, three parameters may be specified only within a text
object and shall not persist from one text object to the next:
•    Tm, the text matrix.
•    Tlm, the text line matrix.
•    Trm, the text rendering matrix, which is actually just an intermediate result that combines the
effects of text state parameters, the text matrix (Tm), and the current transformation matrix.
A text object begins with the BT operator and ends with the ET operator, as shown in the Example, and
described in "Table 105 — Text object operators".
NOTE        Although text objects cannot be statically nested, text can be shown using a Type 3 font whose
glyph descriptions include any graphics objects, including another text object. Likewise, the
current colour can be a tiling pattern whose pattern cell includes a text object.
EXAMPLE
BT
…Zero or more text operators or other allowed operators…
ET
Table 105 — Text object operators
Operands         Operator       Description
—                BT             Begin a text object, initializing the text matrix, Tm, and the text line
matrix, Tlm, to the identity matrix. Text objects shall not be nested;
a second BT shall not appear before an ET.
306                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Operands             Operator         Description
—                    ET               End a text object, discarding the text matrix.
These specific categories of text-related operators may appear in a text object:
•    Text state operators, described in 9.3, "Text state parameters and operators".
•    Text-positioning operators, described in 9.4.2, "Text-positioning operators".
•    Text-showing operators, described in 9.4.3, "Text-showing operators".
The latter two subclauses also provide further details about these text object parameters. The other
operators that may appear in a text object are those related to the general graphics state, colour, and
marked-content, as shown in "Figure 9 — Graphics objects".
When the graphics state stack operators q and Q (see 8.4.2, "Graphics state stack") are combined with
the text object operators BT and ET, each pair of matching operators (q … Q) shall be properly
(separately) nested. Therefore, the sequences
q
BT
…
ET
Q
and
BT
q
…
Q
ET
are valid, but
q
BT
…
Q
ET
and
BT
q
…
ET
Q
are not valid.
NOTE        The above paragraph and example sequences were added in this document (2020).
9.4.2 Text-positioning operators
Text space is the coordinate system in which text is shown. It shall be defined by the text matrix, Tm,
and the text state parameters Tfs, Th, and Trise, which together shall determine the transformation from
text space to user space. Specifically, the origin of the first glyph shown by a text-showing operator
shall be placed at the origin of text space. If text space has been translated, scaled, or rotated, then the
position, size, or orientation of the glyph in user space shall be correspondingly altered.
The text-positioning operators shall only appear within text objects.
Table 106 — Text-positioning operators
Operands       Operator      Description
tx ty          Td            Move to the start of the next line, offset from the start of the
current line by (tx, ty). tx and ty shall denote numbers
expressed in unscaled text space units. More precisely, this
operator shall perform these assignments:
1         0     0
𝑇𝑚 = 𝑇𝑙𝑚 = [ 0         1     0] × 𝑇𝑙𝑚
𝑡𝑥         𝑡𝑦    1
tx ty          TD            Move to the start of the next line, offset from the start of the
current line by (tx, ty). As a side effect, this operator shall set
the leading parameter in the text state. This operator shall
have the same effect as this code:
-ty TL
tx ty Td
abcdef         Tm            Set the text matrix, Tm, and the text line matrix, Tlm:
𝑎         𝑏     0
𝑇𝑚 = 𝑇𝑙𝑚 = [ 𝑐        𝑑     0]
𝑒        𝑓     1
The operands shall all be numbers, and the initial value for
Tm and Tlm shall be the identity matrix, [1 0 0 1 0 0].
Although the operands specify a matrix, they shall be passed
to Tm as six separate numbers, not as an array.
The matrix specified by the operands shall not be
concatenated onto the current text matrix, but shall replace
it.
—              T*            Move to the start of the next line. This operator has the same
effect as the code
0 –Tl TD
where Tl denotes the current leading parameter in the text
state. The negative of Tl is used here because Tl is the text
leading expressed as a positive number. Going to the next
line entails decreasing the y coordinate.
At the beginning of a text object, Tm shall be the identity matrix; therefore, the origin of text space shall
be initially the same as that of user space. The text-positioning operators, described in "Table 106 —
Text-positioning operators" alter Tm and thereby control the placement of glyphs that are subsequently
painted. Also, the text-showing operators, described in "Table 107 — Text-showing operators", update
Tm (by altering its e and f translation components) to take into account the horizontal or vertical
displacement of each glyph painted as well as any character or word-spacing parameters in the text
state.
308                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Additionally, within a text object, a PDF processor shall keep track of a text line matrix, Tlm, which
captures the value of Tm at the beginning of a line of text. The text-positioning and text-showing
operators shall read and set Tlm on specific occasions mentioned in "Table 106 — Text-positioning
operators" and "Table 107 — Text-showing operators".
NOTE        This can be used to compactly represent evenly spaced lines of text.
9.4.3 Text-showing operators
The text-showing operators ("Table 107 — Text-showing operators") shall show text on the page,
repositioning text space as they do so. All of the operators shall interpret the text string and apply the
text state parameters as described in "Table 107 — Text-showing operators".
The text-showing operators shall only appear within text objects.
Table 107 — Text-showing operators
Operands          Operator       Description
string            Tj             Show a text string.
string            '              Move to the next line and show a text string. This operator shall have
the same effect as the code
T*
string Tj
aw ac string      "              Move to the next line and show a text string, using aw as the word
spacing and ac as the character spacing (setting the corresponding
parameters in the text state). aw and ac shall be numbers expressed in
unscaled text space units. This operator shall have the same effect as
this code:
aw Tw
ac Tc
string '
Array             TJ             Show zero or more text strings, allowing individual glyph positioning.
Each element of array shall be either a string or a number. If the
element is a string, this operator shall show the string. If it is a
number, the operator shall adjust the text position by that amount;
that is, it shall translate the text matrix, Tm . The number shall be
expressed in thousandths of a unit of text space (see 9.4.4, "Text space
details"). This amount shall be subtracted from the current horizontal
or vertical coordinate, depending on the writing mode. In the default
coordinate system, a positive adjustment has the effect of moving the
next glyph painted either to the left or down by the given amount.
"Figure 61 — Operation of the TJ operator in horizontal writing"
shows an example of the effect of passing offsets to TJ.
Figure 61 — Operation of the TJ operator in horizontal writing
A string operand of a text-showing operator shall be interpreted as a sequence of character codes
identifying the glyphs to be painted.
With a simple font, each byte of the string shall be treated as a separate character code. The character
code shall then be looked up in the font’s encoding to select the glyph, as described in 9.6.5, "Character
encoding".
With a composite font (PDF 1.2), multiple-byte codes may be used to select glyphs. In this instance, one
or more consecutive bytes of the string shall be treated as a single character code. The code lengths
and the mappings from codes to glyphs are defined in a data structure called a CMap, described in 9.7,
"Composite fonts".
The strings shall conform to the syntax for string objects. When a string is written by enclosing the data
in parentheses, bytes whose values are equal to those of the ASCII characters LEFT PARENTHESIS
(28h), RIGHT PARENTHESIS (29h), and REVERSE SOLIDUS (5Ch) (backslash) shall be preceded by a
REVERSE SOLIDUS) character. All other byte values between 0 and 255 may be used in a string object.
These rules apply to each individual byte in a string object, whether the string is interpreted by the
text-showing operators as single-byte or multiple-byte character codes.
Strings presented to the text-showing operators may be of any length — even an empty string or a
single character code per string — and may be placed on the page in any order. The grouping of glyphs
into strings has no significance for the display of text. Showing multiple glyphs with one invocation of a
text-showing operator such as Tj shall produce the same results as showing them with a separate
invocation for each glyph.
NOTE 1     Use of longer text strings is generally more efficient.
NOTE 2     In some cases, the text that is extracted can vary depending on the grouping of glyphs into
strings. See, for example, 14.8.2.5.3, "Reverse-order show strings".
NOTE 3     Empty strings are valid.
9.4.4 Text space details
As stated in 9.4.2, "Text-positioning operators", text shall be shown in text space, defined by the
combination of the text matrix, Tm, and the text state parameters Tfs, Th, and Trise . This determines how
text coordinates are transformed into user space. Both the glyph’s shape and its displacement
(horizontal or vertical) shall be interpreted in text space.
NOTE 1     Glyphs are actually defined in glyph space, whose definition varies according to the font type as
discussed in 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics". Glyph coordinates are first transformed from
glyph space to text space before being subjected to the transformations described in Note 2.
310                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
NOTE 2      Conceptually, the entire transformation from text space to device space can be represented by a
text rendering matrix, Trm :
𝑇𝑓𝑠 × 𝑇ℎ   0     0
𝑇𝑟𝑚 = [ 0          𝑇𝑓𝑠 0] × 𝑇𝑚 × 𝐶𝑇𝑀
0    𝑇𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 1
Trm is a temporary matrix; conceptually, it is recomputed before each glyph is painted during a
text-showing operation.
After the glyph is painted, the text matrix shall be updated according to the glyph displacement and any
spacing parameters that apply. First, a combined displacement shall be computed, denoted by tx in
horizontal writing mode or ty in vertical writing mode (the variable corresponding to the other writing
mode shall be set to 0):
𝑇𝑗
𝑡𝑥 = ((𝑤0 −      ) × 𝑇𝑓𝑠 + 𝑇𝑐 + 𝑇𝑤 ) × 𝑇ℎ
1000
𝑇𝑗
𝑡𝑦 = (𝑤1 −       ) × 𝑇𝑓𝑠 + 𝑇𝑐 + 𝑇𝑤
1000
where
w0 and w1 denote the glyph’s horizontal and vertical displacements
Tj denotes a number in a TJ array, if any, which specifies a position adjustment
Tfs and Th denote the current text font size and horizontal scaling parameters in the graphics state
Tc and Tw denote the current character-and word-spacing parameters in the graphics state, if
applicable
The text matrix then shall be updated as follows:
1      0    0
𝑇𝑚 = [ 0      1    0] × 𝑇𝑚
𝑡𝑥      𝑡𝑦   1
9.5      Introduction to font data structures
A font shall be represented in PDF as a dictionary specifying the type of font, its PostScript language
name, its encoding, and information that can be used to provide a substitute when the font program is
not available. Optionally, the font program (more commonly known as font files) may be embedded as
a stream object in the PDF file.
NOTE 1      See 9.2, "Organisation and use of fonts" for more introductory information.
"Table 108 — Font types" lists the types of fonts that are supported in ISO 32000 along with the value
that shall be used for the Subtype key in the font dictionary that represents the font. No values for
Subtype other than those listed in the table are valid. Type 0 fonts are called composite fonts; other
types of fonts are called simple fonts. In addition to fonts, PDF supports two classes of font-related
objects, called CIDFonts and CMaps, described in 9.7.2, "CID-Keyed fonts overview". CIDFonts are listed
in "Table 108 — Font types" because, like fonts, they are collections of glyphs; however, a CIDFont
shall not be used directly but only as a component of a Type 0 font.
Table 108 — Font types
Type            Subtype Value     Description
Type 0          Type0             (PDF 1.2) A composite font — a font composed of glyphs
from a descendant CIDFont (see 9.7, "Composite fonts")
Type 1          Type1             A font that defines glyph shapes using Type 1 font
technology (see 9.6.2, "Type 1 fonts").
MMType1           A multiple master font — an extension of the Type 1 font
that allows the generation of a wide variety of typeface
styles from a single font (see 9.6.2.3, "Multiple master fonts")
Type 3          Type3             A font that defines glyphs with streams of PDF graphics
operators (see 9.6.4, "Type 3 fonts")
TrueType        TrueType          A font based on the TrueType font format (see 9.6.3,
"TrueType fonts") and with glyph descriptions based on
TrueType glyph technology.
CIDFont         CIDFontType0      (PDF 1.2) A CIDFont whose glyph descriptions are based on
CFF font technology (see 9.7.4, "CIDFonts")
CIDFontType2      (PDF 1.2) A CIDFont whose glyph descriptions are based on
TrueType glyph technology (see 9.7.4, "CIDFonts")
NOTE 2     Embedding of OpenType font programs (files) in PDF is described in "Table 124 — Embedded
font organisation for various font types" when the value of the FontFile3 key is OpenType. The
font dictionary that refers to it can have a Subtype of TrueType, Type1, CIDFontType0, or
CIDFontType2, depending upon the glyph technology used in the OpenType font and other
details provided in that table.
For all font types, the term font dictionary refers to a PDF dictionary containing information about the
font; likewise, a CIDFont dictionary contains information about a CIDFont. Except for Type 3, this
dictionary is distinct from the font program that defines the font’s glyphs. That font program may be
embedded in the PDF file as a stream object or be obtained from some external source.
NOTE 3     This terminology differs from that used in the PostScript language. In PostScript, a font
dictionary is a PostScript data structure that is created as a direct result of interpreting a font
program. In PDF, a font program is always treated as if it were a separate file, even when its
content is embedded in the PDF file. The font program is interpreted by a specialised font
interpreter when necessary; its contents never materialize as PDF objects.
NOTE 4     Most font programs (and related programs, such as CIDFonts and CMaps) conform to external
specifications, such as the Adobe Type 1 Font Format. This document does not include those
specifications. See 2, "Normative references" for more information about the specifications
mentioned in this clause.
NOTE 5     The most predictable and dependable results are produced when all font programs used to show
text are embedded in the PDF file. See 9.9, "Embedded font programs" for the precise description
of how to do so. If a PDF file refers to font programs that are not embedded, the results depend
on the availability of fonts in the PDF processor’s environment. See 9.8, "Font descriptors" for
some conventions for referring to external font programs. However, some details of font naming,
font substitution, and glyph selection are implementation-dependent and can vary among
different PDF processors and operating system environments.
312                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
9.6      Simple fonts
9.6.1 General
There are several types of simple fonts, all of which have these properties:
•    Glyphs in the font shall be selected by single-byte character codes obtained from a string that is
shown by the text-showing operators (see 9.4.3, "Text-showing operators"). Logically, these
codes index into a table of 256 glyphs; the mapping from codes to glyphs is called the font’s
encoding. Under some circumstances, the encoding may be altered by means described in 9.6.5,
"Character encoding".
•    Each glyph shall have a single set of metrics, including a horizontal displacement or width, as
described in 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics"; that is, simple fonts support only horizontal
writing mode.
•    Except for Type 0 fonts, Type 3 fonts in non-tagged PDF documents, and certain standard Type
1 fonts, every font dictionary shall contain a subsidiary dictionary, the font descriptor,
containing font-wide metrics and other attributes of the font; see 9.8, "Font descriptors".
Among those attributes is an optional, but strongly recommended, font file stream containing
the font program.
9.6.2 Type 1 fonts
9.6.2.1           General
A Type 1 font program is a stylised PostScript language program that describes glyph shapes. It uses a
compact encoding for the glyph descriptions, and it includes hint information that enables high-quality
rendering even at small sizes and low resolutions.
NOTE 1      Details on this format are provided in a separate specification, Adobe Type 1 Font Format. An
alternative, more compact but functionally equivalent representation of a Type 1 font program is
documented in Adobe Technical Note #5176, The Compact Font Format Specification.
NOTE 2      Although a Type 1 font program uses PostScript language syntax, using it does not require a full
PostScript language compatible interpreter; a specialised Type 1 font interpreter suffices.
A Type 1 font dictionary may contain the entries listed in "Table 109 — Entries in a Type 1 font
dictionary".
Table 109 — Entries in a Type 1 font dictionary
Key                Type           Value
Type               name           (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be Font for
a font dictionary.
Subtype            name           (Required) The type of font; shall be Type1 for a Type 1 font.
Name               name           (Required in PDF 1.0; optional in PDF 1.1 through 1.7, deprecated in PDF 2.0) The
name by which this font is referenced in the Font subdictionary of the current
resource dictionary.
Key               Type         Value
BaseFont          name         (Required) The PostScript language name of the font. For Type 1 fonts, this is
always the value of the FontName entry in the font program; for more
information, see Section 5.2 of the PostScript Language Reference, Third Edition.
The PostScript language name of the font may be used to find the font program in
the PDF processor or its environment. It is also the name that is used when
printing to a PostScript language compatible output device.
FirstChar         integer      (Required; optional in PDF 1.0-1.7 for the standard 14 fonts) The first character
code defined in the font’s Widths array.
LastChar          integer      (Required; optional in PDF 1.0-1.7 for the standard 14 fonts) The last character
code defined in the font’s Widths array.
Widths            array        (Required; optional in PDF 1.0-1.7 for the standard 14 fonts; indirect reference
preferred) An array of (LastChar - FirstChar + 1) numbers, each element being
the glyph width for the character code that equals FirstChar plus the array index.
For character codes outside the range FirstChar to LastChar, the value of
MissingWidth from the FontDescriptor entry for this font shall be used. The
glyph widths shall be measured in units in which 1000 units correspond to 1 unit
in text space. These widths shall be consistent with the actual widths given in the
font program. For more information on glyph widths and other glyph metrics, see
9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics".
FontDescriptor dictionary (Required; optional in PDF 1.0-1.7 for the standard 14 fonts; shall be an indirect
reference) A font descriptor describing the font’s metrics other than its glyph
widths (see 9.8, "Font descriptors").
For the standard 14 fonts, the entries FirstChar, LastChar, Widths, and
FontDescriptor shall either all be present or all be absent. Ordinarily, these
dictionary keys may be absent; specifying them enables a standard font to be
overridden; see 9.6.2.2, "Standard Type 1 fonts (standard 14 fonts) (PDF 1.0-
1.7)".
Encoding          name or    (Optional) A specification of the font’s character encoding if different from its
dictionary built-in encoding. The value of Encoding shall be either the name of a predefined
encoding (MacRomanEncoding, MacExpertEncoding, or WinAnsiEncoding, as
described in Annex D, "Character sets and encodings") or an encoding dictionary
that shall specify differences from the font’s built-in encoding or from a specified
predefined encoding (see 9.6.5, "Character encoding").
ToUnicode         stream       (Optional; PDF 1.2) A stream containing a CMap file that maps character codes to
Unicode values (see 9.10.3, "ToUnicode CMaps").
PDF versions 1.0 to 1.7 did not require Type 1 font dictionaries to include FirstChar, LastChar,
Widths and FontDescriptor entries as described in 9.6.2.2, "Standard Type 1 fonts (standard 14 fonts)
(PDF 1.0-1.7)". For compatibility reasons PDF processors shall provide glyph widths and font
descriptor data for those standard fonts for use in processing PDF files when the entries are absent.
EXAMPLE        This example shows the font dictionary for the Adobe Garamond® Semibold font. The font has an encoding
dictionary (object 25), however neither the encoding dictionary nor the font descriptor (object 7) is shown.
14 0 obj
<</Type /Font
/Subtype /Type1
/BaseFont /AGaramond-Semibold
314                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
/FirstChar 0
/LastChar 255
/Widths 21 0 R
/FontDescriptor 7 0 R
/Encoding 25 0 R
>>
endobj
21 0 obj
[ 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255 255
255 280 438 510 510 868 834 248 320 320 420 510 255 320 255 347
510 510 510 510 510 510 510 510 510 510 255 255 510 510 510 330
781 627 627 694 784 580 533 743 812 354 354 684 560 921 780 792
588 792 656 504 682 744 650 968 648 590 638 320 329 320 510 500
380 420 510 400 513 409 301 464 522 268 259 484 258 798 533 492
516 503 349 346 321 520 434 684 439 448 390 320 255 320 510 255
627 627 694 580 780 792 744 420 420 420 420 420 420 402 409 409
409 409 268 268 268 268 533 492 492 492 492 492 520 520 520 520
486 400 510 510 506 398 520 555 800 800 1044 360 380 549 846 792
713 510 549 549 510 522 494 713 823 549 274 354 387 768 615 496
330 280 510 549 510 549 612 421 421 1000 255 627 627 792 1016 730
500 1000 438 438 248 248 510 494 448 590 100 510 256 256 539 539
486 255 248 438 1174 627 580 627 580 580 354 354 354 354 792 792
790 792 744 744 744 268 380 380 380 380 380 380 380 380 380 380
]
endobj
9.6.2.2           Standard Type 1 fonts (standard 14 fonts) (PDF 1.0-1.7)
The PostScript language names of 14 Type 1 fonts, known as the standard 14 fonts, are as follows:
Times-Roman, Helvetica, Courier, Symbol, Times-Bold, Helvetica-Bold, Courier-Bold, ZapfDingbats,
Times-Italic, Helvetica-Oblique, Courier-Oblique, Times-BoldItalic, Helvetica-BoldOblique, Courier-
BoldOblique.
In PDF 1.0 to PDF 1.7, the FirstChar, LastChar, Widths and FontDescriptor (see “Table 109 —
Entries in a Type 1 font dictionary") were optional in Type 1 font dictionaries for the standard 14 fonts.
PDF processors supporting PDF 1.0 to PDF 1.7 files shall have these fonts, or their font metrics and
suitable substitution fonts, available.
These fonts, or their font metrics and suitable substitution fonts, shall be available to the PDF
processor.
9.6.2.3           Multiple master fonts
The multiple master font format is an extension of the Type 1 font format as specified in Adobe
Technical Note #5015, Type 1 Font Format Supplement, that allows the generation of a wide variety of
typeface styles from a single font program. This is accomplished through the presence of various
design dimensions in the font.
EXAMPLE 1         Examples of design dimensions are weight (light to extra-bold) and width (condensed to expanded).
Coordinates along these design dimensions (such as the degree of boldness) are specified by numbers.
A particular choice of numbers selects an instance of the multiple master font. PDFs can contain
multiple master instances.
The font dictionary for a multiple master font instance contains the same entries as a Type 1 font
dictionary (see "Table 109 — Entries in a Type 1 font dictionary"), with these differences:
•    The value of Subtype shall be MMType1.
•    If the PostScript language name of the instance contains SPACEs (20h), the SPACEs shall be
replaced by LOW LINEs (underscores) (5Fh) in the value of BaseFont. For instance, as illustrated
in this example, the name "MinionMM 366 465 11 " (which ends with a SPACE character)
becomes /MinionMM_366_465_11_.
EXAMPLE 2
7 0 obj
<</Type /Font
/Subtype /MMType1
/BaseFont /MinionMM_366_465_11_
/FirstChar 32
/LastChar 255
/Widths 19 0 R
/FontDescriptor 6 0 R
/Encoding 5 0 R
>>
endobj
19 0 obj
[187 235 317 430 427 717 607 168 326 326 421 619 219 317 219 282 427
… Omitted data …
569 0 569 607 607 607 239 400 400 400 400 253 400 400 400 400 400
]
endobj
This example illustrates a convention for including the numeric values of the design coordinates as
part of the instance’s BaseFont name.
NOTE        This convention is commonly used for accessing multiple master font instances from an external
source in the PDF processor’s environment; it is documented in Adobe Technical Note #5088,
Font Naming Issues. However, this convention is not prescribed as part of this specification.
If the font program for a multiple master font instance is embedded in the PDF file, it shall be an
ordinary Type 1 font program, not a multiple master font program. This font program is called a
snapshot of the multiple master font instance that incorporates the chosen values of the design
coordinates.
9.6.3 TrueType fonts
PDF TrueType fonts are those with a Subtype value of TrueType in the font dictionary. PDF fonts of
this type shall support both the TrueType font format (see Apple Computer, Inc., TrueType Reference
Manual) as well as the OpenType font format (as defined by ISO/IEC 14496-22).
A TrueType font dictionary may contain the same entries as a Type 1 font dictionary (see "Table 109 —
Entries in a Type 1 font dictionary"), with these differences:
•    The value of Subtype shall be TrueType.
•    The value of Encoding is subject to limitations that are described in 9.6.5.4, "Encodings for
TrueType fonts".
•    The value of BaseFont is derived differently.
The PostScript language name for the value of BaseFont should be determined in one of two ways:
316                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
•    If the TrueType or OpenType font program's "name" table contains a PostScript language name, it
should be used.
•    In the absence of a PostScript language name in the "name" table, a PostScript language name
should be derived from the name by which the font is known in the host operating system.
NOTE 1      The OpenType font format (also known as Open Font Format, or ISO/IEC 14496-22) was
developed jointly by Microsoft and Adobe. It extends the TrueType font format, developed by
Apple, to include more metadata about the glyphs and text layout as well as supporting both the
TrueType glyph technology and the CFF glyph technology (see Adobe Technical Note #5176, The
Compact Font Format Specification). OpenType is available on most modern operating systems.
NOTE 2      A TrueType or an OpenType font program can be embedded directly in a PDF file as a stream
object.
NOTE 3      The Type 42 font format that is defined for the PostScript language does not apply to PDF.
NOTE 4      For CJK (Chinese, Japanese, and Korean) fonts, the host font system’s font name is often encoded
in the host operating system’s script. For instance, a Japanese font can have a name that is
written in Japanese using some (unidentified) Japanese encoding. Thus, TrueType font names
can contain multiple-byte character codes, each of which requires multiple characters to
represent in a PDF name object (using the # notation to quote special characters as needed).
9.6.4 Type 3 fonts
Type 3 fonts differ from the other fonts supported by PDF. Font dictionaries for other fonts simply
contain information about the font and refer to a separate font program for the actual glyph
descriptions; a Type 3 font dictionary contains the glyph descriptions. In Type 3 fonts, glyphs shall be
defined by streams of PDF graphics operators. These streams shall be associated with glyph names. A
separate encoding entry shall map character codes to the appropriate glyph names for the glyphs.
NOTE 1      Type 3 fonts are more flexible than Type 1 fonts because the glyph descriptions can contain
arbitrary PDF graphics operators. However, Type 3 fonts have no hinting mechanism for
improving output at small sizes or low resolutions.
A Type 3 font dictionary may contain the entries listed in "Table 110 — Entries in a Type 3 font
dictionary".
Table 110 — Entries in a Type 3 font dictionary
Key                 Type          Value
Type                name          (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be Font
for a font dictionary.
Subtype             name          (Required) The type of font; shall be Type3 for a Type 3 font.
Name                name          (Required in PDF 1.0; optional otherwise) See "Table 109 — Entries in a Type 1
font dictionary".
Key            Type         Value
FontBBox       rectangle    (Required) A rectangle (see 7.9.5, "Rectangles") expressed in the glyph
coordinate system, specifying the font bounding box. This is the smallest
rectangle enclosing all marks that would result if all of the glyphs of the font
were placed with their origins coincident and their descriptions executed.
If all four elements of the rectangle are zero, a PDF processor shall make no
assumptions about glyph sizes based on the font bounding box. If any element
is non-zero, the font bounding box shall be accurate. If any glyph’s marks fall
outside this bounding box, behaviour is implementation dependent and may
not match the creator’s expectations.
FontMatrix     array        (Required) An array of six numbers specifying the font matrix, mapping glyph
space to text space (see 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics").
NOTE      A common practice is to define glyphs in terms of a 1000-unit glyph
coordinate system, in which case the font matrix is [0.001 0 0 0.001 0 0].
CharProcs      dictionary   (Required) A dictionary in which each key shall be a glyph name and the value
associated with that key shall be a content stream that constructs and paints
the glyph for that character. The stream shall include as its first operator
either d0 or d1, followed by operators describing one or more graphics
objects. See below for more details about Type 3 glyph descriptions.
Encoding       dictionary   (Required) An encoding dictionary whose Differences array shall specify the
complete character encoding for this font (see 9.6.5, "Character encoding").
FirstChar      integer      (Required) The first character code defined in the font’s Widths array.
LastChar       integer      (Required) The last character code defined in the font’s Widths array.
Widths         array        (Required; should be an indirect reference) An array of (LastChar - FirstChar +
1) numbers, each element being the glyph width for the character code that
equals FirstChar plus the array index. For character codes outside the range
FirstChar to LastChar, the width shall be 0. These widths shall be interpreted
in glyph space as specified by FontMatrix (unlike the widths of a Type 1 font,
which are in thousandths of a unit of text space).
If FontMatrix specifies a rotation, only the horizontal component of the
transformed width shall be used. That is, the resulting displacement shall be
horizontal in text space, as is the case for all simple fonts.
FontDescriptor dictionary   (Required in Tagged PDF documents; shall be an indirect reference) A font
descriptor describing the font’s default metrics other than its glyph widths
(see 9.8, "Font descriptors").
NOTE      (2020) The conditions for when the FontDescriptor key is required were
corrected in this document to match ISO 32000-1:2008.
Resources      dictionary   (Optional but should be used; PDF 1.2) A list of the named resources, such as
fonts and images, required by the glyph descriptions in this font (see 7.8.3,
"Resource dictionaries"). If any glyph descriptions refer to named resources
but this dictionary is absent, the names shall be looked up in the resource
dictionary of the page on which the font is used.
ToUnicode      stream       (Optional; PDF 1.2) A stream containing a CMap file that maps character codes
to Unicode values (see 9.10.3, "ToUnicode CMaps").
318                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
For each character code shown by a text-showing operator that uses a Type 3 font, the PDF processor
shall:
a) Look up the character code in the font’s Encoding entry, as described in 9.6.5, "Character encoding" to
obtain a glyph name.
b) Look up the glyph name in the font’s CharProcs dictionary to obtain a stream object containing a glyph
description. If the name is not present as a key in CharProcs, no glyph shall be painted.
c) Invoke the glyph description. The graphics state shall be saved before this invocation and shall be
restored afterward; therefore, any changes the glyph description makes to the graphics state do not
persist after it finishes.
d) If any glyph descriptions refer to named resources they shall be looked up in the Resources entry of the
Type 3 font dictionary. If any glyph descriptions refer to named resources but this dictionary is absent,
the names shall be looked up in the resource dictionary of the page on which the font is used.
When the glyph description begins execution, the current transformation matrix (CTM) shall be the
concatenation of the font matrix (FontMatrix in the current font dictionary) and the text space that
was in effect at the time the text-showing operator was invoked (see 9.4.4, "Text space details"). This
means that shapes described in the glyph coordinate system are transformed into the user coordinate
system and appear in the appropriate size and orientation on the page. The glyph description shall
describe the glyph in terms of absolute coordinates in the glyph coordinate system, placing the glyph
origin at (0, 0) in this space. It shall make no assumptions about the initial text position.
Aside from the CTM, the graphics state shall be inherited from the graphics state at the point of
invocation of the text-showing operator that caused the glyph description to be invoked. To ensure
predictable results, the glyph description shall initialise any graphics state parameters on which it
depends. In particular, if it invokes any operator from "Table 59 — Path-painting operators" which
performs stroking, it shall explicitly set the line width, line join, line cap, and dash pattern to
appropriate values. The TK flag (see 9.3.8, "Text knockout") of the graphics state controls the
behaviour of glyphs obtained from any font type, including Type 3.
NOTE 2      Normally, it is unnecessary and undesirable to initialise the current colour parameters because
the text-showing operators are designed to paint glyphs with the current colours.
The glyph description shall execute one of the operators described in "Table 111 — Type 3 font
operators" to pass width and bounding box information to the font machinery. This shall precede the
execution of any path construction or path-painting operators describing the glyph.
NOTE 3      Type 3 fonts in PDF are very similar to those in the PostScript language. Some of the information
provided in Type 3 font dictionaries and glyph descriptions, although seemingly redundant or
unnecessary, is nevertheless required for correct results when a PDF processor prints to a
PostScript language compatible output device. This applies particularly to the operands of the d0
and d1 operators, which are the equivalent of PostScript's setcharwidth and setcachedevice.
For further explanation, see clause 5.7 of the PostScript Language Reference, Third Edition.
Table 111 — Type 3 font operators
Operands                Operator Description
wx wy                   d0          Set width information for the glyph and declare that the glyph description
specifies both its shape and its colour.
NOTE 1 This operator name ends in the digit 0.
wx denotes the horizontal displacement in the glyph coordinate system; it shall
be consistent with the corresponding width in the font’s Widths array. wy shall
be 0 (see 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics").
This operator shall only be permitted as the first operator in a content stream
appearing in a Type 3 font’s CharProcs dictionary. It is typically used only if the
glyph description executes operators to set the colour or other colour-related
parameters explicitly.
NOTE 2 An image does set the colour space and colour explicitly; an image mask does
not and requires explicit operators to do so for it.
wx wy llx lly urx ury   d1          Set width and bounding box information for the glyph and declare that the glyph
description specifies only shape, not colour.
NOTE 3 This operator name ends in the digit 1.
wx denotes the horizontal displacement in the glyph coordinate system; it shall
be consistent with the corresponding width in the font’s Widths array. wy shall
be 0 (see 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics").
llx and lly denote the coordinates of the lower-left corner, and urx and ury denote
the upper-right corner, of the glyph bounding box. The glyph bounding box is
the smallest rectangle, oriented with the axes of the glyph coordinate system,
that completely encloses all marks placed on the page as a result of executing the
glyph’s description. The declared bounding box shall be correct — in other
words, sufficiently large to enclose the entire glyph. If any marks fall outside this
bounding box, the result is implementation-dependent.
A glyph description that begins with the d1 operator should not execute any
operators that set the colour (or other colour-related parameters including
transparency) in the graphics state; any use of such operators shall be ignored
and the glyph stream continues to be processed without error (see 8.6.8, "Colour
operators"). The glyph description is executed solely to determine the glyph’s
shape. Its colour shall be determined by the graphics state in effect each time
this glyph is painted by a text-showing operator. For the same reason, the glyph
description shall not include an image; however, an image mask is acceptable,
since it merely defines a region of the page to be painted with the current colour.
This operator shall be used only in a content stream appearing in a Type 3 font’s
CharProcs dictionary.
EXAMPLE            This example shows the definition of a Type 3 font with only two glyphs — a filled square and a filled triangle,
selected by the character codes a and b. "Figure 62 — Output from the example” shows the result of showing
320                                                                                              © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
the string ( ababab ) using this font.
Figure 62 — Output from the example
%Snippet of page content stream that places several Type 3 font strings onto the page
…
0.2 0.8 0.0 rg
0.1 0.4 0.0 RG
BT
/FT3 15 Tf
300 400 Td
(ab) Tj
0.8 0.2 0.0 rg
0.4 0.1 0.0 RG
(ab) Tj
0.8 0.8 0.2 rg
0.4 0.4 0.1 RG
(ab) Tj
ET
…
%Type 3 font definition encoding two glyphs, 'a' and 'b'.
4 0 obj
<<
/Type /Font
/Subtype /Type3
/FontBBox [-36 -36 786 786]
/FontMatrix [0.001 0 0 0.001 0 0]
/CharProcs 10 0 R
/Encoding 9 0 R
/FirstChar 97
/LastChar 104
/Widths [1000 1000]
>>
endobj
9 0 obj
<<
/Type /Encoding
/Differences [97 /square /triangle]
>>
endobj
10 0 obj
<<
/square 11 0 R
/triangle 12 0 R
>>
endobj
%Type 3 "square" glyph description
11 0 obj
<</Length …>>
stream
1000 0 -36 -36 786 786 d1                          %uncoloured glyph - defines only shape
72 w
0 0 750 750 re
B
endstream
endobj
%Type 3 "triangle" glyph description
12 0 obj
<</Length …>>
stream
1000 0 d0                                          %coloured glyph - defines colour and shape
72 w
0.2 0.6 0.8 rg
0.1 0.3 0.4 RG
0 0 m
375 750 l
750 0 l
b
endstream
endobj
9.6.5 Character encoding
9.6.5.1         General
A font’s encoding is the association between character codes (obtained from text strings that are
shown) and glyph descriptions. This subclause describes the character encoding scheme used with
simple PDF fonts. Composite fonts (Type 0) use a different character mapping algorithm, as discussed
in 9.7, "Composite fonts".
Except for Type 3 fonts, every font program shall have a built-in encoding. Under certain
circumstances, a PDF font dictionary may change the encoding used with the font program to match
the requirements of the PDF writer generating the text being shown.
This flexibility in character encoding is valuable for two reasons:
•    It permits showing text that is encoded according to any of the various existing conventions. For
example, the Microsoft WindowsTM and Apple Mac OS operating systems use different standard
encodings for Latin text, and many PDF writers use their own special-purpose encodings.
•    It permits PDF writers to specify how characters selected from a large character set are to be
encoded.
Some character sets consist of more than 256 characters, including ligatures, accented characters, and
other symbols required for high-quality typography or non-Latin writing systems. Different encodings
may select different subsets of the same character set.
One commonly used font encoding for Latin-text font programs is often referred to as
StandardEncoding. The name StandardEncoding shall have no special meaning in PDF, but this
encoding does play a role as a default encoding (as shown in "Table 112 — Entries in an encoding
dictionary"). The regular encodings used for Latin-text fonts on Mac OS and Microsoft WindowsTM
systems shall be named MacRomanEncoding and WinAnsiEncoding, respectively. An encoding named
MacExpertEncoding may be used with "expert" fonts that contain additional characters useful for
322                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
sophisticated typography. Complete details of these encodings and of the characters present in typical
fonts are provided in Annex D, "Character sets and encodings".
In PDF, a font is classified as either nonsymbolic or symbolic according to whether all of its characters
are members of the standard Latin character set; see D.2, "Latin character set and encodings". This
shall be indicated by flags in the font descriptor; see 9.8.2, "Font descriptor flags". Symbolic fonts
contain other character sets, to which the encodings mentioned previously ordinarily do not apply.
Such font programs have built-in encodings that are usually unique to each font. The standard 14 fonts
include two symbolic fonts, Symbol and ZapfDingbats, whose encodings and character sets are
documented in Annex D, "Character sets and encodings".
A font program’s built-in encoding may be overridden by including an Encoding entry in the PDF font
dictionary. The possible encoding modifications depend on the font type. The value of the Encoding
entry shall be either a named encoding (the name of one of the predefined encodings
MacRomanEncoding, MacExpertEncoding, or WinAnsiEncoding) or an encoding dictionary. An encoding
dictionary contains the entries listed in "Table 112 — Entries in an encoding dictionary".
Table 112 — Entries in an encoding dictionary
Key                    Type           Value
Type                   name           (Optional) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; if
present, shall be Encoding for an encoding dictionary.
BaseEncoding           name           (Optional) The base encoding — that is, the encoding from which the
Differences entry (if present) describes differences — shall be the
name of one of the predefined encodings MacRomanEncoding,
MacExpertEncoding, or WinAnsiEncoding (see Annex D, "Character
sets and encodings").
If this entry is absent, the Differences entry shall describe differences
from a default base encoding. For a font program that is embedded in
the PDF file, the default base encoding shall be the font program’s
built-in encoding, as described in 9.6.5, "Character encoding" and
further elaborated in the subclauses on specific font types. Otherwise,
for a nonsymbolic font, it shall be StandardEncoding, and for a
symbolic font, it shall be the font’s built-in encoding.
Differences            array          (Optional; should not be used with TrueType fonts) An array describing
the differences from the encoding specified by BaseEncoding or, if
BaseEncoding is absent from a default base encoding. The
Differences array is described in subsequent subclauses.
The value of the Differences entry shall be an array of character codes and character names organised
as follows:
code1 name1,1 name1,2 …
code2 name2,1 name2,2 …
…
coden namen,1 namen,2 …
Each code shall be the first index in a sequence of character codes to be changed. The first character
name after the code becomes the name corresponding to that code. Subsequent names replace
consecutive code indices until the next code appears in the array or the array ends. These sequences
may be specified in any order but shall not overlap.
EXAMPLE          In the encoding dictionary in this example, the name quotesingle ( ' ) is associated with character code 39,
Adieresis (Ä) with code 128, Aring (Å) with 129, and trademark (™) with 170.
25 0 obj
<</Type /Encoding
/Differences
[39 /quotesingle
96 /grave
128 /Adieresis /Aring /Ccedilla /Eacute /Ntilde /Odieresis /Udieresis
/aacute /agrave /acircumflex /adieresis /atilde /aring /ccedilla
/eacute /egrave /ecircumflex /edieresis /iacute /igrave /icircumflex
/idieresis /ntilde /oacute /ograve /ocircumflex /odieresis /otilde
/uacute /ugrave /ucircumflex /udieresis /dagger /degree /cent
/sterling /section /bullet /paragraph /germandbls /registered
/copyright /trademark /acute /dieresis
174 /AE /Oslash
177 /plusminus
180 /yen /mu
187 /ordfeminine /ordmasculine
190 /ae /oslash /questiondown /exclamdown /logicalnot
196 /florin
199 /guillemotleft /guillemotright /ellipsis
203 /Agrave /Atilde /Otilde /OE /oe /endash /emdash /quotedblleft
/quotedblright /quoteleft /quoteright /divide
216 /ydieresis /Ydieresis /fraction /currency /guilsinglleft /guilsinglright
/fi /fl /daggerdbl /periodcentered /quotesinglbase /quotedblbase
/perthousand /Acircumflex /Ecircumflex /Aacute /Edieresis /Egrave
/Iacute /Icircumflex /Idieresis /Igrave /Oacute /Ocircumflex
241 /Ograve /Uacute /Ucircumflex /Ugrave /dotlessi /circumflex /tilde
/macron /breve /dotaccent /ring /cedilla /hungarumlaut /ogonek /caron
]
>>
endobj
9.6.5.2          Encodings for Type 1 fonts
A Type 1 font program’s glyph descriptions are keyed by glyph names, not by character codes. Glyph
names are ordinary PDF name objects. Descriptions of Latin alphabetic characters are normally
associated with names consisting of single letters, such as A or a. Other characters are associated with
names composed of words, such as three, ampersand, or parenleft. A Type 1 font’s built-in encoding
shall be defined by an “encoding” array that is part of the font program, not to be confused with the
Encoding entry in the PDF font dictionary.
324                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
An Encoding entry in the PDF font dictionary, if present, shall override a Type 1 font’s mapping from
character codes to character names. The Differences array maps codes to the names of glyph
descriptions that exist in the font program, regardless of whether those glyphs are referenced by the
font’s built-in encoding or by the encoding specified in the BaseEncoding entry.
All Type 1 font programs shall contain an actual glyph named .notdef. The effect produced by showing
the .notdef glyph is at the discretion of the font designer. If an encoding maps to a character name that
does not exist in the Type 1 font program, the .notdef glyph shall be substituted.
NOTE      If a font has no .notdef glyph definition, the results are implementation dependent.
9.6.5.3        Encodings for Type 3 fonts
A Type 3 font, like a Type 1 font, contains glyph descriptions that are keyed by glyph names; in this
case, they appear as explicit keys in the font’s CharProcs dictionary. A Type 3 font’s mapping from
character codes to glyph names shall be entirely defined by its Encoding entry, which is required for
Type 3 fonts.
NOTE      Type 3 fonts do not support the concept of a default glyph name.
9.6.5.4        Encodings for TrueType fonts
A TrueType or OpenType font program’s built-in encoding maps directly from character codes to glyph
descriptions by means of an internal data structure called a "cmap" (not to be confused with the CMap
described in 9.7.5, "CMaps"). This subclause describes how the PDF font dictionary’s Encoding entry
shall be used in conjunction with a "cmap" to map from a character code in a string to a glyph
description in a TrueType/OpenType font program.
A "cmap" table may contain one or more subtables that represent multiple encodings intended for use
on different platforms (such as Mac OS and Microsoft WindowsTM). Each subtable shall be identified by
the two numbers, such as (3, 1), that represent a combination of a platform ID and a platform-specific
encoding ID, respectively.
Glyph names are not required in TrueType/OpenType fonts, although some font programs have an
optional "post" table listing glyph names for the glyphs. If the PDF processor needs to select glyph
descriptions by name, it translates from glyph names to codes in one of the encodings given in the font
program’s "cmap" table. When there is no character code in the "cmap" that corresponds to a glyph
name, the "post" table shall be used to select a glyph description directly from the glyph name.
Because some aspects of TrueType/OpenType glyph selection are dependent on the PDF processor or
the operating system, PDF files that use TrueType/OpenType fonts should follow certain guidelines to
ensure predictable behaviour across all PDF processors:
•   The font program should be embedded.
•   A nonsymbolic font should specify MacRomanEncoding or WinAnsiEncoding as the value of its
Encoding entry, with no Differences array. See also D.2 "Latin character set and encodings"
notes 5 and 6 for situations when a Differences array is required.
•   A font that is used to display glyphs that do not use MacRomanEncoding or WinAnsiEncoding
should not specify an Encoding entry. The font descriptor’s Symbolic flag (see "Table 121 — Font
flags") should be set, and its font program’s "cmap" table should contain a (1, 0) subtable. It may
also contain a (3, 0) subtable; if present, this subtable should map from character codes in the
range 0xF000 to 0xF0FF by prepending the single-byte codes in the (1, 0) subtable with 0xF0 and
mapping to the corresponding glyph descriptions.
NOTE 1     Some popular TrueType/OpenType font programs contain incorrect encoding information.
Implementations of TrueType/OpenType font interpreters have evolved heuristics for dealing
with such problems; those heuristics are not described here. For maximum portability, only well-
formed TrueType/OpenType font programs can be used in PDF files. Therefore, a
TrueType/OpenType font program to be used in a PDF file could need modification to conform
to these guidelines.
NOTE 2     Not all glyphs of a TrueType/OpenType font are always accessible with simple PDF font
resources. A Type 0 PDF font resource can be used to access those glyphs.
The following paragraphs describe the treatment of TrueType font encodings beginning with PDF 1.3.
If the font has a named Encoding entry of either MacRomanEncoding or WinAnsiEncoding, or if the font
descriptor’s Nonsymbolic flag (see "Table 121 — Font flags") is set, the PDF processor shall create a
table that maps from character codes to glyph names:
•    If the Encoding entry is one of the names MacRomanEncoding or WinAnsiEncoding, the table shall
be initialised with the mappings described in Annex D, "Character sets and encodings".
•    If the Encoding entry is a dictionary, the table shall be initialised with the entries from the
dictionary’s BaseEncoding entry (see "Table 112 — Entries in an encoding dictionary"). Any
entries in the Differences array shall be used to update the table. Finally, any undefined entries in
the table shall be filled using StandardEncoding.
If a (3, 1) "cmap" subtable (Microsoft Unicode) is present:
•    A character code shall be first mapped to a glyph name using the table described above.
•    The glyph name shall then be mapped to a Unicode value by consulting the Adobe Glyph List and
Adobe Glyph List for New Fonts.
•    Finally, the Unicode value shall be mapped to a glyph description according to the (3, 1) subtable.
If no (3, 1) subtable is present but a (1, 0) subtable (Macintosh Roman) is present:
•    A character code shall be first mapped to a glyph name using the table described above.
•    The glyph name shall then be mapped back to a character code according to the standard Roman
encoding used on Mac OS.
•    Finally, the code shall be mapped to a glyph description according to the (1, 0) subtable.
In any of these cases, if the glyph name cannot be mapped as specified, the glyph name shall be looked
up in the font program’s "post" table (if one is present) and the associated glyph description shall be
used.
The standard Roman encoding that is used on Mac OS is the same as the MacRomanEncoding described
in Annex D, "Character sets and encodings" with the addition of 15 entries and the replacement of the
currency glyph with the Euro glyph, as shown in "Table 113 — Additional entries in Mac OS Roman
encoding not in MacRomanEncoding".
326                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 113 — Additional entries in Mac OS Roman encoding not in MacRomanEncoding
Name                         Code (Octal)                 Code (Decimal)
notequal                     255                          173
infinity                     260                          176
lessequal                    262                          178
greaterequal                 263                          179
partialdiff                  266                          182
summation                    267                          183
product                      270                          184
pi                           271                          185
integral                     272                          186
Omega                        275                          189
radical                      303                          195
approxequal                  305                          197
Delta                        306                          198
lozenge                      327                          215
Euro                         333                          219
apple                        360                          240
When the font has no Encoding entry, or the font descriptor’s Symbolic flag is set (in which case the
Encoding entry is ignored), this shall occur:
•    If the font contains a (3, 0) subtable, the range of character codes shall be one of these: 0x0000 -
0x00FF, 0xF000 - 0xF0FF, 0xF100 - 0xF1FF, or 0xF200 - 0xF2FF. Depending on the range of
codes, each byte from the string shall be prepended with the high byte of the range, to form a two-
byte character, which shall be used to select the associated glyph description from the subtable.
•    Otherwise, if the font contains a (1, 0) subtable, single bytes from the string shall be used to look
up the associated glyph descriptions from the subtable.
If a character cannot be mapped in any of the ways described previously, a PDF processor may supply a
mapping of its choosing.
9.7      Composite fonts
9.7.1 General
A composite font, also called a Type 0 font, is one whose glyphs are obtained from a font-like object
called a CIDFont. A composite font shall be represented by a font dictionary whose Subtype value is
Type0. The Type 0 font is known as the root font, and its associated CIDFont is called its descendant.
NOTE 1     Composite fonts in PDF are analogous to composite fonts in PostScript but with some limitations.
In particular, PDF requires that the character encoding be defined by a CMap, which is only one
of several encoding methods available in PostScript. Also, the PostScript language allows a Type
0 font to have multiple descendants, which can also be Type 0 fonts. PDF supports only a single
descendant, which are always a CIDFont.
When the current font is composite, the text-showing operators shall behave differently than with
simple fonts. For simple fonts, each byte of a string to be shown selects one glyph, whereas for
composite fonts, a sequence of one or more bytes are decoded to select a glyph from the descendant
CIDFont.
NOTE 2     This facility supports the use of very large character sets, such as those for the Chinese, Japanese,
and Korean languages. It also simplifies the organisation of fonts that have complex encoding
requirements.
This subclause first introduces the architecture of CID-keyed fonts, which are the only kind of
composite font supported in PDF. Then it describes the CIDFont and CMap dictionaries, which are the
PDF objects that represent the correspondingly named components of a CID-keyed font. Finally, it
describes the Type 0 font dictionary, which combines a CIDFont and a CMap to produce a font whose
glyphs may be accessed by means of variable-length character codes in a string to be shown.
9.7.2 CID-Keyed fonts overview
CID-keyed fonts provide a convenient and efficient method for defining multiple-byte character
encodings and fonts with a large number of glyphs. These capabilities provide great flexibility for
representing text in writing systems for languages with large character sets, such as Chinese, Japanese,
and Korean (CJK).
The CID-keyed font architecture specifies the external representation of certain font programs, called
CMap and CIDFont files, along with some conventions for combining and using those files. As
mentioned earlier, PDF does not support the entire CID-keyed font architecture, which is independent
of PDF; CID-keyed fonts may be used in other environments.
NOTE       For complete documentation on the architecture and the file formats, see Adobe Technical Note
#5092, CID-Keyed Font Technology Overview, and Adobe Technical Note #5014, Adobe CMap and
CIDFont Files Specification. This subclause describes only the PDF objects that represent these
font programs.
The term CID-keyed font reflects the fact that CID (character identifier) numbers are used to index and
access the glyph descriptions in the font. This method is more efficient for large fonts than the method
of accessing by character name, as is used for some simple fonts. CIDs range from 0 to a maximum
value that may be subject to implementation limits (see Annex C, "Advice on maximising portability").
A character collection is an ordered set of glyphs. The order of the glyphs in the character collection
shall determine the CID number for each glyph. Each CID-keyed font shall explicitly reference the
character collection on which its CID numbers are based; see 9.7.3, "CIDSystemInfo dictionaries".
A CMap (character map) file shall specify the correspondence between character codes and the CID
numbers used to identify glyphs. It is equivalent to the concept of an encoding in simple fonts. Whereas
a simple font allows a maximum of 256 glyphs to be encoded and accessible at one time, a CMap can
328                                                                           © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
describe a mapping from multiple-byte codes to thousands of glyphs in a large CID-keyed font.
EXAMPLE           A CMap can describe Shift-JIS, one of several widely used encodings for Japanese.
A CMap file may reference an entire character collection or a subset of a character collection. The CMap
file’s mapping yields a font number (which in PDF shall be 0) and a character selector (which in PDF
shall be a CID). Furthermore, a CMap file may incorporate another CMap file by reference, without
having to duplicate it. These features enable character collections to be combined or supplemented and
make all the constituent characters accessible to text-showing operations through a single encoding.
A CIDFont contains the glyph descriptions for a character collection. The glyph descriptions themselves
are typically in a format similar to those used in simple fonts, such as Type 1. However, they are
identified by CIDs rather than by names, and they are organised differently.
In PDF, the data from a CMap file and CIDFont shall be represented by PDF objects as described in
9.7.4, "CIDFonts" and 9.7.5, "CMaps". The CMap file and CIDFont programs themselves may be either
referenced by name or embedded as stream objects in the PDF file.
A CID-keyed font, then, shall be the combination of a CMap with a CIDFont containing glyph
descriptions. It shall be represented as a Type 0 font. It contains an Encoding entry whose value shall
be a CMap dictionary, and its DescendantFonts entry shall reference the CIDFont dictionary with
which the CMap has been combined.
9.7.3 CIDSystemInfo dictionaries
CIDFont and CMap dictionaries shall contain a CIDSystemInfo entry specifying the character collection
assumed by the CIDFont associated with the CMap — that is, the interpretation of the CID numbers
used by the CIDFont. A character collection shall be uniquely identified by the Registry, Ordering, and
Supplement entries in the CIDSystemInfo dictionary, as described in "Table 114 — Entries in a
CIDSystemInfo dictionary". In order for a CIDFont and a CMap to be compatible, their Registry and
Ordering values shall be the same. Identity CMaps (Identity-H and Identity-V) are compatible with all
CIDFonts.
The CIDSystemInfo entry in a CIDFont is a dictionary that shall specify the CIDFont’s character
collection. The CIDFont need not contain glyph descriptions for all the CIDs in a collection; it may
contain a subset. The CIDSystemInfo entry in a CMap file shall be either a single dictionary or an array
of dictionaries, depending on whether it associates codes with a single character collection or with
multiple character collections; see 9.7.5, "CMaps".
For proper behaviour, the CIDSystemInfo entry of a CMap shall be compatible with that of the CIDFont
or CIDFonts with which it is used.
Table 114 — Entries in a CIDSystemInfo dictionary
Key              Type            Value
Registry         ASCII string    (Required) A string identifying the issuer of the character
collection. The string shall begin with the 4 or 5 characters of a
registered developer prefix followed by a LOW LINE (5Fh)
followed by any other identifying characters chosen by the issuer.
See Annex E, "Extending PDF", for how to obtain a unique
developer prefix.
Ordering         ASCII string    (Required) A string that uniquely names the character collection
within the specified registry.
Supplement       integer         (Required) The supplement number of the character collection. An
original character collection has a supplement number of 0.
Whenever additional CIDs are assigned in a character collection,
the supplement number shall be increased. Supplements shall not
alter the ordering of existing CIDs in the character collection. This
value shall not be used in determining compatibility between
character collections.
9.7.4 CIDFonts
9.7.4.1           General
A CIDFont program contains glyph descriptions that are accessed using a CID as the character selector.
There are two types of CIDFonts:
•    A Type 0 CIDFont contains glyph descriptions based on CFF
NOTE         The term "Type 0" when applied to a CIDFont has a different meaning than for a "Type 0 font".
•    A Type 2 CIDFont contains glyph descriptions based on the TrueType glyph technology.
A CIDFont dictionary is a PDF object that contains information about a CIDFont program. Although its
Type value is Font, a CIDFont is not actually a font. It does not have an Encoding entry, it may not be
listed in the Font subdictionary of a resource dictionary, and it may not be used as the operand of the
Tf operator. It shall be used only as a descendant of a Type 0 font. The CMap in the Type 0 font shall be
what defines the encoding that maps character codes to CIDs in the CIDFont. "Table 115 — Entries in a
CIDFont dictionary" lists the entries in a CIDFont dictionary.
Table 115 — Entries in a CIDFont dictionary
Key                  Type        Value
Type                 name        (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes;
shall be Font for a CIDFont dictionary.
Subtype              name        (Required) The type of CIDFont shall be CIDFontType0 or
CIDFontType2.
330                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                    Type           Value
BaseFont               name           (Required) The PostScript name of the CIDFont. For Type 0
CIDFonts, this shall be the value of the CIDFontName entry in the
CIDFont program. For Type 2 CIDFonts, it shall be derived the
same way as for a simple TrueType font; see 9.6.3, "TrueType
fonts". In either case, the name may have a subset prefix if
appropriate; see 9.9.2, "Font subsets".
CIDSystemInfo          dictionary     (Required) A dictionary containing entries that define the
character collection of the CIDFont. See "Table 114 — Entries in a
CIDSystemInfo dictionary".
FontDescriptor         dictionary     (Required; shall be an indirect reference) A font descriptor
describing the CIDFont’s default metrics other than its glyph
widths (see 9.8, "Font descriptors").
DW                     number         (Optional) The default width for glyphs in the CIDFont (see
9.7.4.3, "Glyph metrics in CIDFonts"). Default value: 1000.
W                      array          (Optional) A description of the widths for the glyphs in the
CIDFont.
NOTE      The array’s elements have a variable format that can specify
individual widths for consecutive CIDs or one width for a range
of CIDs (see 9.7.4.3, "Glyph metrics in CIDFonts").
Default value: none (the DW value shall be used for all glyphs).
DW2                    array          (Optional; applies only to CIDFonts used for vertical writing) An
array of two numbers specifying the default metrics for vertical
writing (see 9.7.4.3, "Glyph metrics in CIDFonts"). Default value:
[880 -1000].
W2                     array          (Optional; applies only to CIDFonts used for vertical writing) A
description of the metrics for vertical writing for the glyphs in the
CIDFont (see 9.7.4.3, "Glyph metrics in CIDFonts"). Default value:
none (the DW2 value shall be used for all glyphs).
CIDToGIDMap            stream or      (Required for Type 2 CIDFonts with embedded font programs) A
name           specification of the mapping from CIDs to glyph indices. If the
value is a stream, the bytes in the stream shall contain the
mapping from CIDs to glyph indices: the glyph index for a
particular CID value c shall be a 2-byte value stored in bytes
2 × 𝑐 and 2 × 𝑐 + 1, where the first byte shall be the high-order
byte. If the value of CIDToGIDMap is a name, it shall be Identity,
indicating that the mapping between CIDs and glyph indices is the
identity mapping.
9.7.4.2           Glyph selection in CIDFonts
Type 0 and Type 2 CIDFonts handle the mapping from CIDs to glyph descriptions in somewhat
different ways. For Type 0, the CIDFont program contains glyph descriptions that are identified by
CIDs. The CIDFont program identifies the character collection by a CIDSystemInfo dictionary, which
should be copied into the PDF CIDFont dictionary. CIDs shall be interpreted uniformly in all CIDFont
programs supporting a given character collection, whether the program is embedded in the PDF file or
obtained from an external source.
When the CIDFont contains an embedded font program that is represented in the Compact Font
Format (CFF), the FontFile3 entry in the font descriptor (see "Table 124 — Embedded font
organisation for various font types") shall be either CIDFontType0C or OpenType. There are two cases,
depending on the contents of the font program:
•    The "CFF" font program has a Top DICT that uses CIDFont operators: The CIDs shall be used to
determine the GID value for the glyph procedure using the charset table in the CFF program. The
GID value shall then be used to look up the glyph procedure using the CharStrings INDEX table (as
defined by Adobe Technical Note #5177, The Type 2 Charstring Format).
NOTE       Although in many fonts the CID value and GID value are the same, the CID and GID values can
differ.
•    The "CFF" font program has a Top DICT that does not use CIDFont operators: The CIDs shall be
used directly as GID values, and the glyph procedure shall be retrieved using the CharStrings
INDEX (refer to Adobe Technical Note #5177, The Type 2 Charstring Format).
For Type 2, the CIDFont program is actually a TrueType font program, which has no native notion of
CIDs. In a TrueType font program, glyph descriptions are identified by glyph index values. Glyph indices
are internal to the font and are not defined consistently from one font to another. Instead, a TrueType
font program contains a "cmap" table that provides mappings directly from character codes to glyph
indices for one or more predefined encodings.
TrueType font programs are integrated with the CID-keyed font architecture in one of two ways,
depending on whether the font program is embedded in the PDF file:
•    If the TrueType font program is embedded, the Type 2 CIDFont dictionary shall contain a
CIDToGIDMap entry that maps CIDs to the glyph indices for the appropriate glyph descriptions in
that font program.
•    If the TrueType font program is not embedded but is referenced by name, and the Type 2 CIDFont
dictionary contains a CIDToGIDMap entry, the CIDToGIDMap entry shall be ignored, since it is
not meaningful to refer to glyph indices in an external font program. In this case, CIDs shall not
participate in glyph selection, and only predefined CMaps may be used with this CIDFont (see
9.7.5, "CMaps"). The PDF processor shall select glyphs by translating characters from the
encoding specified by the predefined CMap to one of the encodings in the TrueType font’s "cmap"
table. The means by which this is accomplished are implementation-dependent.
Even though the CIDs are not used to select glyphs in a Type 2 CIDFont, they shall always be used to
determine the glyph metrics, as described in the next subclause.
Every CIDFont shall contain a glyph description for CID 0, which is analogous to the .notdef character
name in simple fonts (see 9.7.6.3, "Handling undefined characters").
9.7.4.3         Glyph metrics in CIDFonts
As discussed in 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics", the width of a glyph refers to the horizontal
displacement between the origin of the glyph and the origin of the next glyph when writing in
horizontal mode. In this mode, the vertical displacement between origins shall be 0. Widths for a
CIDFont are defined using the DW and W entries in the CIDFont dictionary. These widths shall be
consistent with the actual widths given in the CIDFont program.
332                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
The W array allows the definition of widths for individual CIDs. The elements of the W array shall be
numbers organised in groups of two or three, where each group shall be in one of these two formats:
c [w1 w2… wn]
cfirst clast w
In the first format, c shall be an integer specifying a starting CID value; it shall be followed by an array
of n numbers that shall specify the widths for n consecutive CIDs, starting with c. The second format
shall define the same width, w, as a number, for all CIDs in the range cfirst to clast. Specifying a given CID
value more than once should not be done. In the case where it is done, the first specification is the one
that shall be used.
EXAMPLE 1          In this example, the glyphs having CIDs 120, 121, and 122 are 400, 325, and 500 units wide, respectively.
CIDs in the range 7080 through 8032 inclusive all have a width of 1000 units.
W entry example:
/W [120     [400 325 500]
7080 8032 1000
]
Glyphs from a CIDFont may be shown in vertical writing mode. This is selected by the WMode entry in
the associated CMap dictionary; see 9.7.5, "CMaps". To be used in this way, the CIDFont shall define the
vertical displacement for each glyph and the position vector that relates the horizontal and vertical
writing origins.
The default position vector and vertical displacement vector shall be specified by the DW2 entry in the
CIDFont dictionary. DW2 shall be an array of two values: the vertical component of the position vector
v and the vertical component of the displacement vector w1 (see "Figure 55 — Metrics for horizontal
and vertical writing modes"). The horizontal component of the position vector shall be half the glyph
width, and that of the displacement vector shall be 0.
EXAMPLE 2          If the DW2 entry is
/DW2 [880 -1000]
then a glyph’s position vector and vertical displacement vector are
v = (w0 ÷ 2, 880)
w1 = (0, −1000)
where w0 is the width (horizontal displacement) for the same glyph.
NOTE         A negative value for the vertical component places the origin of the next glyph below the current
glyph because vertical coordinates in a standard coordinate system increase from bottom to top.
The W2 array shall define vertical metrics for individual CIDs. The elements of the array shall be
organised in groups of two or five, where each group shall be in one of these two formats:
c [ w11y v1x v1y w12y v2x v2y … ]
cfirst clast w11y v1x v1y
In the first format, c is a starting CID and shall be followed by an array containing numbers interpreted
in groups of three. Each group shall consist of the vertical component of the vertical displacement
vector w1 (whose horizontal component shall be 0) followed by the horizontal and vertical
components for the position vector v. Successive groups shall define the vertical metrics for
consecutive CIDs starting with c. The second format defines a range of CIDs from cfirst to clast, that
shall be followed by three numbers that define the vertical metrics for all CIDs in this range.
EXAMPLE 3       This W2 entry defines the vertical displacement vector for the glyph with CID 120 as (0, -1000) and the
position vector as (250, 772). It also defines the displacement vector for CIDs in the range 7080 through
8032 as (0, -1000) and the position vector as (500, 900).
/W2 [120 [-1000 250 772]
7080 8032 -1000 500 900
]
9.7.5 CMaps
9.7.5.1          General
A CMap shall specify the mapping from character codes to character selectors. In PDF, the character
selectors shall be CIDs in a CIDFont (as mentioned earlier, PostScript CMaps can use names or codes as
well). A CMap serves a function analogous to the Encoding dictionary for a simple font. The CMap shall
not refer directly to a specific CIDFont; instead, it shall be combined with it as part of a CID-keyed font,
represented in PDF as a Type 0 font dictionary (see 9.7.6, "Type 0 font dictionaries"). Within the CMap,
the character mappings shall refer to the associated CIDFont by font number, which in PDF shall be 0.
PDF also uses a special type of CMap to map character codes to Unicode values (see 9.10.3, "ToUnicode
CMaps").
A CMap shall specify the writing mode — horizontal or vertical — for any CIDFont with which the
CMap is combined. The writing mode determines which metrics shall be used when glyphs are painted
from that font.
NOTE        Writing mode is specified as part of the CMap because, in some cases, different shapes are used
when writing horizontally and vertically. In such cases, the horizontal and vertical variants of a
CMap specify different CIDs for a given character code.
A CMap shall be specified in one of two ways:
•    As a name object identifying a predefined CMap, whose value shall be one of the predefined CMap
names defined in "Table 116 — Predefined CJK CMap names".
•    As a stream object whose contents shall be a CMap file.
9.7.5.2          Predefined CMaps
Several of the CMaps define mappings from Unicode encodings to character collections. Unicode values
appearing in a text string shall be represented in big-endian order (high-order byte first). CMap names
containing "UCS2" use UCS-2 encoding; names containing "UTF16" use UTF-16BE (big-endian)
encoding.
NOTE 1      "Table 116 — Predefined CJK CMap names" lists the names of the predefined CMaps. These
CMaps map character codes to CIDs in a single descendant CIDFont. CMaps whose names end in
H specify horizontal writing mode; those ending in V specify vertical writing mode.
334                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 116 — Predefined CJK CMap names
Name                    Description
Chinese (Simplified)
GB-EUC-H                Microsoft Code Page 936 (lfCharSet 0x86), GB 2312-80 character set, EUC-CN
encoding
GB-EUC-V                Vertical version of GB-EUC-H
GBpc-EUC-H              Mac OS, GB 2312-80 character set, EUC-CN encoding, Script Manager code 19
GBpc-EUC-V              Vertical version of GBpc-EUC-H
GBK-EUC-H               Microsoft Code Page 936 (lfCharSet 0x86), GBK character set, GBK encoding
GBK-EUC-V               Vertical version of GBK-EUC-H
GBKp-EUC-H              Same as GBK-EUC-H but replaces half-width Latin characters with proportional
forms and maps character code 0x24 to a dollar sign ($) instead of a yuan symbol
(¥)
GBKp-EUC-V              Vertical version of GBKp-EUC-H
GBK2K-H                 GB 18030-2000 character set, mixed 1-, 2-, and 4-byte encoding
GBK2K-V                 Vertical version of GBK2K-H
UniGB-UCS2-H            Unicode (UCS-2) encoding for the Adobe-GB1 character collection
UniGB-UCS2-V            Vertical version of UniGB-UCS2-H
UniGB-UTF16-H           Unicode (UTF-16BE) encoding for the Adobe-GB1 character collection; contains
mappings for all characters in the GB18030-2000 character set
UniGB-UTF16-V           Vertical version of UniGB-UTF16-H
Chinese (Traditional)
B5pc-H                  Mac OS, Big Five character set, Big Five encoding, Script Manager code 2
B5pc-V                  Vertical version of B5pc-H
HKscs-B5-H              Hong Kong SCS, an extension to the Big Five character set and encoding
HKscs-B5-V              Vertical version of HKscs-B5-H
ETen-B5-H               Microsoft Code Page 950 (lfCharSet 0x88), Big Five character set with ETen
extensions
ETen-B5-V               Vertical version of ETen-B5-H
ETenms-B5-H             Same as ETen-B5-H but replaces half-width Latin characters with proportional
forms
ETenms-B5-V             Vertical version of ETenms-B5-H
Name               Description
CNS-EUC-H          CNS 11643-1992 character set, EUC-TW encoding
CNS-EUC-V          Vertical version of CNS-EUC-H
UniCNS-UCS2-H      Unicode (UCS-2) encoding for the Adobe-CNS1-6 character collection
UniCNS-UCS2-V      Vertical version of UniCNS-UCS2-H
UniCNS-UTF16-H     Unicode (UTF-16BE) encoding for the Adobe-CNS1-6 character collection;
contains mappings for all the characters in the HKSCS-2001 character set and
contains both 2- and 4-byte character codes
UniCNS-UTF16-V     Vertical version of UniCNS-UTF16-H
Japanese
83pv-RKSJ-H        Mac OS, JIS X 0208 character set with KanjiTalk6 extensions, Shift-JIS encoding,
Script Manager code 1
90ms-RKSJ-H        Microsoft Code Page 932 (lfCharSet 0x80), JIS X 0208 character set with NEC and
IBM® extensions
90ms-RKSJ-V        Vertical version of 90ms-RKSJ-H
90msp-RKSJ-H       Same as 90ms-RKSJ-H but replaces half-width Latin characters with proportional
forms
90msp-RKSJ-V       Vertical version of 90msp-RKSJ-H
90pv-RKSJ-H        Mac OS, JIS X 0208 character set with KanjiTalk7 extensions, Shift-JIS encoding,
Script Manager code 1
Add-RKSJ-H         JIS X 0208 character set with Fujitsu FMR extensions, Shift-JIS encoding
Add-RKSJ-V         Vertical version of Add-RKSJ-H
EUC-H              JIS X 0208 character set, EUC-JP encoding
EUC-V              Vertical version of EUC-H
Ext-RKSJ-H         JIS C 6226 (JIS78) character set with NEC extensions, Shift-JIS encoding
Ext-RKSJ-V         Vertical version of Ext-RKSJ-H
H                  JIS X 0208 character set, ISO-2022-JP encoding
V                  Vertical version of H
UniJIS-UCS2-H      Unicode (UCS-2) encoding for the Adobe-Japan1 character collection
UniJIS-UCS2-V      Vertical version of UniJIS-UCS2-H
UniJIS-UCS2-HW-H Same as UniJIS-UCS2-H but replaces proportional Latin characters with half-width
forms
336                                                                                       © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Name                   Description
UniJIS-UCS2-HW-V Vertical version of UniJIS-UCS2-HW-H
UniJIS-UTF16-H         Unicode (UTF-16BE) encoding for the Adobe-Japan1 character collection;
contains mappings for all characters in the JIS X 0213:1000 character set
UniJIS-UTF16-V         Vertical version of UniJIS-UTF16-H
Korean
KSC-EUC-H              KS X 1001:1992 character set, EUC-KR encoding
KSC-EUC-V              Vertical version of KSC-EUC-H
KSCms-UHC-H           Microsoft Code Page 949 (lfCharSet 0x81), KS X 1001:1992 character set plus
8822 additional hangul, Unified Hangul Code (UHC) encoding
KSCms-UHC-V            Vertical version of KSCms-UHC-H
KSCms-UHC-HW-H Same as KSCms-UHC-H but replaces proportional Latin characters with half-width
forms
KSCms-UHC-HW-V Vertical version of KSCms-UHC-HW-H
KSCpc-EUC-H            Mac OS, KS X 1001:1992 character set with Mac OS KH extensions, Script Manager
Code 3
UniKS-UCS2-H           Unicode (UCS-2) encoding for the Adobe-Korea1 character collection
UniKS-UCS2-V           Vertical version of UniKS-UCS2-H
UniKS-UTF16-H          Unicode (UTF-16BE) encoding for the Adobe-Korea1 character collection
UniKS-UTF16-V          Vertical version of UniKS-UTF16-H
Generic
Identity-H             The horizontal identity mapping for 2-byte CIDs; may be used with CIDFonts
using any Registry, Ordering, and Supplement values. It maps 2-byte character
codes ranging from 0 to 65,535 to the same 2-byte CID value, interpreted high-
order byte first.
Identity-V             Vertical version of Identity-H. The mapping is the same as for Identity-H.
NOTE 2      The Identity-H and Identity-V CMaps can be used to refer to glyphs directly by their CIDs when
showing a text string.
When the current font is a Type 0 font whose Encoding entry is Identity-H or Identity-V, the string to
be shown shall contain pairs of bytes representing CIDs, high-order byte first. When the descendant
font of a Type 0 font is a Type 2 CIDFont in which the CIDToGIDMap entry is Identity and if the
TrueType font is embedded in the PDF file, the 2-byte CID values shall be identical glyph indices for the
glyph descriptions in the TrueType font program.
Table 117 — Character collections for predefined CMaps, by PDF version
Table intentionally empty to retain table numbering in this document (2020).
Information is now located in the appropriate normative reference for each character collection.
A PDF processor shall support Adobe-CNS1-7, Adobe-GB1-5, Adobe-Japan1-7 and Adobe-KR-9
character collections. ". Adobe-Japan2-0 and Adobe-Korea1-2 are deprecated in this document (2020).
As noted in 9.7.3, "CIDSystemInfo dictionaries", a character collection is identified by registry,
ordering, and supplement number, and supplements are cumulative; that is, a higher-numbered
supplement includes the CIDs contained in lower-numbered supplements, as well as some additional
CIDs. Consequently, text encoded according to the predefined CMaps for a given PDF version shall be
valid when interpreted by a PDF processor supporting the same or a later PDF version. When
interpreted by a PDF processor supporting an earlier PDF version, such text causes an error if a CMap
is encountered that is not predefined for that PDF version. If character codes are encountered that
were added in a higher-numbered supplement than the one corresponding to the supported PDF
version, no characters are displayed for those codes; see 9.7.6.3, "Handling undefined characters".
Other supplements of these character collections may be used, but if the supplement is higher-
numbered than the one corresponding to the supported PDF version, only the CIDs in the latter
supplement are considered to be standard CIDs.
The Identity-H and Identity-V CMaps shall not be used with a non-embedded font. Only standardized
character sets may be used.
NOTE 4     If a PDF processor producing a PDF file encounters text to be included that uses CIDs from a
higher-numbered supplement than the one corresponding to the PDF version being generated,
the application will need to embed the CMap for the higher-numbered supplement rather than
refer to the predefined CMap.
The CMap programs that define the predefined CMaps are available through a variety of online sources.
9.7.5.3          Embedded CMap files
For character encodings that are not predefined, the PDF file shall contain a stream that defines the
CMap. In addition to the standard entries for streams (listed in "Table 5 — Entries common to all
stream dictionaries"), the CMap stream dictionary contains the entries listed in "Table 118 —
Additional entries in a CMap stream dictionary". The data in the stream defines the mapping from
character codes to a font number and a character selector. The data shall follow the syntax defined in
Adobe Technical Note #5014, Adobe CMap and CIDFont Files Specification.
Table 118 — Additional entries in a CMap stream dictionary
Key                   Type          Value
Type                  name          (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be
CMap for a CMap dictionary.
CMapName              name          (Required) The name of the CMap. It shall be the same as the value of
CMapName in the CMap file.
338                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                    Type            Value
CIDSystemInfo          dictionary      (Required) A dictionary (see 9.7.3, "CIDSystemInfo dictionaries")
containing entries that define the character collection for the CIDFont or
CIDFonts associated with the CMap. The value of this entry shall be the
same as the value of CIDSystemInfo in the CMap file. (However, it does
not need to match the values of CIDSystemInfo for the Identity-H or
Identity-V CMaps.)
WMode                  integer         (Optional) A code that specifies the writing mode for any CIDFont with
which this CMap is combined. The value shall be 0 for horizontal or 1 for
vertical. Default value: 0. The value of this entry shall be the same as the
value of WMode in the CMap file.
UseCMap                name or         (Optional) The name of a predefined CMap, or a stream containing a
stream          CMap. If this entry is present, the referencing CMap shall specify only the
character mappings that differ from the referenced CMap.
9.7.5.4           CMap example and operator summary
Embedded CMap files shall conform to the format documented in Adobe Technical Note #5014, subject
to these additional constraints:
a) If the embedded CMap file contains a usecmap reference, the CMap indicated there shall also be
identified by the UseCMap entry in the CMap stream dictionary.
b) The usefont operator, if present, shall specify a font number of 0.
c) The beginbfchar and endbfchar shall not appear in a CMap that is used as the Encoding entry of a Type
0 font; however, they may appear in the definition of a ToUnicode CMap.
d) A notdef mapping, defined using beginnotdefchar, endnotdefchar, beginnotdefrange, and
endnotdefrange shall be used if the normal mapping produces a CID for which no glyph is present in
the associated CIDFont.
e) The beginrearrangedfont, endrearrangedfont, beginusematrix, and endusematrix operators shall
not be used.
NOTE        While often used for mapping 2 byte character codes to CID codes, character codes with just 1
byte or more than 2 bytes can be used, as long as they can be mapped to CID codes without
ambiguity.
EXAMPLE           This example shows a sample CMap for a Japanese Shift-JIS encoding. Character codes in this encoding can
be either 1 or 2 bytes in length. This CMap could be used with a CIDFont that uses the same CID ordering as
specified in the CIDSystemInfo entry. Note that several of the entries in the stream dictionary are also
replicated in the stream data.
22 0 obj
<</Type /CMap
/CMapName /90ms-RKSJ-H
/CIDSystemInfo <</Registry (Adobe)
/Ordering (Japan1)
/Supplement 2
>>
/WMode 0
/Length 23 0 R
>>
stream
%!PS-Adobe-3 . 0 Resource-CMap
%%DocumentNeededResources : ProcSet (CIDInit)
%%IncludeResource : ProcSet (CIDInit)
%%BeginResource : CMap (90ms-RKSJ-H)
%%Title : (90ms-RKSJ-H Adobe Japan1 2)
%%Version : 10 . 001
%%Copyright : Copyright 1990-2001 Adobe Systems Inc .
%%Copyright : All Rights Reserved .
%%EndComments
/CIDInit /ProcSet findresource begin
12 dict begin begincmap
/CIDSystemInfo
3 dict dup begin
/Registry (Adobe) def
/Ordering (Japan1) def
/Supplement 2 def
end def
/CMapName /90ms-RKSJ-H def
/CMapVersion 10 . 001 def
/CMapType 1 def
/UIDOffset 950 def
/XUID [1 10 25343] def
/WMode 0 def
4 begincodespacerange
<00>        <80>
<8140>      <9FFC>
<A0>        <DF>
<E040>      <FCFC>
endcodespacerange
1 beginnotdefrange
<00>        <1F>      231
endnotdefrange
100 begincidrange
<20>        <7D>     231
<7E>        <7E>     631
<8140>      <817E> 633
<8180>      <81AC> 696
<81B8>      <81BF> 741
<81C8>      <81CE> 749
… Additional ranges …
<FB40>      <FB7E> 8518
<FB80>      <FBFC> 8581
<FC40>      <FC4B> 8706
endcidrange
endcmap
CMapName currentdict /CMap defineresource pop
end
end
%%EndResource
%%EOF
endstream
endobj
9.7.6 Type 0 font dictionaries
9.7.6.1        General
A Type 0 font dictionary contains the entries listed in "Table 119 — Entries in a Type 0 font
dictionary".
340                                                                                    © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Table 119 — Entries in a Type 0 font dictionary
Key                   Type         Value
Type                  name         (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be
Font for a font dictionary.
Subtype               name         (Required) The type of font; shall be Type0 for a Type 0 font.
BaseFont              name         (Required) The name of the font. If the descendant is a Type 0 CIDFont, this
name should be the concatenation of the CIDFont’s BaseFont name, a
hyphen, and the CMap name given in the Encoding entry (or the
CMapName entry in the CMap). If the descendant is a Type 2 CIDFont, this
name should be the same as the CIDFont’s BaseFont name.
NOTE     In principle, this is an arbitrary name, since there is no font program
associated directly with a Type 0 font dictionary. The conventions
described here ensure maximum compatibility with existing PDF
processors.
Encoding              name or       (Required) The name of a predefined CMap, or a stream containing a CMap
stream       that maps character codes to font numbers and CIDs. If the descendant is a
Type 2 CIDFont whose associated TrueType font program is not embedded
in the PDF file, the Encoding entry shall be a predefined CMap name (see
9.7.4.2, "Glyph selection in CIDFonts").
DescendantFonts array              (Required) A one-element array specifying the CIDFont dictionary that is the
descendant of this Type 0 font.
ToUnicode             stream       (Optional) A stream containing a CMap file that maps character codes to
Unicode values (see 9.9.2, "Font subsets").
EXAMPLE           This code sample shows a Type 0 font.
14 0 obj
<</Type /Font
/Subtype /Type0
/BaseFont /HeiseiMin-W5-90ms-RKSJ-H
/Encoding /90ms-RKSJ-H
/DescendantFonts [15 0 R]
>>
endobj
9.7.6.2           CMap mapping
The Encoding entry of a Type 0 font dictionary specifies a CMap that specifies how text-showing
operators (such as Tj) shall interpret the bytes in the string to be shown when the current font is the
Type 0 font. This subclause describes how the characters in the string shall be decoded and mapped
into character selectors, which in PDF are always CIDs.
The codespace ranges in the CMap (delimited by begincodespacerange and endcodespacerange)
specify how many bytes are extracted from the string for each successive character code. A codespace
range shall be specified by a pair of codes of some particular length giving the lower and upper bounds
of that range. A code shall be considered to match the range if it is the same length as the bounding
codes and the value of each of its bytes lies between the corresponding bytes of the lower and upper
bounds. The code length shall not be greater than 4.
A sequence of one or more bytes shall be extracted from the string and matched against the codespace
ranges in the CMap. That is, the first byte shall be matched against 1-byte codespace ranges; if no
match is found, a second byte shall be extracted, and the 2-byte code shall be matched against 2-byte
codespace ranges. This process continues for successively longer codes until a match is found or all
codespace ranges have been tested. There will be at most one match because codespace ranges shall
not overlap.
The code extracted from the string shall be looked up in the character code mappings for codes of that
length. (These are the mappings defined by beginbfchar, endbfchar, begincidchar, endcidchar, and
corresponding operators for ranges.) Failing that, it shall be looked up in the notdef mappings, as
described in the next subclause.
The results of the CMap mapping algorithm are a font number and a character selector. The font
number shall be used as an index into the Type 0 font’s DescendantFonts array to select a CIDFont. In
PDF, the font number shall be 0 and the character selector shall be a CID; this is the only case described
here. The CID shall then be used to select a glyph in the CIDFont. If the CIDFont contains no glyph for
that CID, the notdef mappings shall be consulted, as described in 9.7.6.3, "Handling undefined
characters".
9.7.6.3         Handling undefined characters
A CMap mapping operation can fail to select a glyph for a variety of reasons. This subclause describes
those reasons and what happens when they occur.
If a code maps to a CID for which no such glyph exists in the descendant CIDFont, the notdef mappings
in the CMap shall be consulted to obtain a substitute character selector. These mappings are delimited
by the operators beginnotdefchar, endnotdefchar, beginnotdefrange, and endnotdefrange within
an embedded CMap file. They shall always map to a CID. If a matching notdef mapping is found, the CID
selects a glyph in the associated descendant, which shall be a CIDFont. If no glyph exists for that CID,
the glyph for CID 0 (which shall be present) shall be substituted.
NOTE       The notdef mappings are similar to the .notdef character mechanism in simple fonts.
If the CMap does not contain either a character mapping or a notdef mapping for the code, descendant
0 shall be selected and the glyph for CID 0 shall be substituted from the associated CIDFont.
If the code is invalid — that is, the bytes extracted from the string to be shown do not match any
codespace range in the CMap — a substitute glyph is chosen as just described. The character mapping
algorithm shall be reset to its original position in the string, and a modified mapping algorithm chooses
the best partially matching codespace range:
a) If the first byte extracted from the string to be shown does not match the first byte of any codespace
range, the range having the shortest codes shall be chosen.
b) Otherwise (that is, if there is a partial match), for each additional byte extracted, the code accumulated so
far shall be matched against the beginnings of all longer codespace ranges until the longest such partial
match has been found. If multiple codespace ranges have partial matches of the same length, the one
having the shortest codes shall be chosen.
The length of the codes in the chosen codespace range determines the total number of bytes to
consume from the string for the current mapping operation.
342                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
For an embedded TrueType font with a CIDtoGIDMap stream, if a (character) code does not have a
corresponding GID in the CIDtoGIDMap stream, the glyph for CID 0 shall be substituted.
9.8      Font descriptors
9.8.1 General
A font descriptor specifies metrics and other attributes of a simple font or a CIDFont as a whole, as
distinct from the metrics of individual glyphs. These font metrics provide information that enables a
PDF processor to synthesise a substitute font or select a similar font when the font program is
unavailable. The font descriptor may also be used to embed the font program in the PDF file.
Font descriptors shall not be used with Type 0 fonts. Beginning with PDF 1.5, font descriptors may be
used with Type 3 fonts.
A font descriptor is a dictionary whose entries specify various font attributes. The entries common to
all font descriptors — for both simple fonts and CIDFonts — are listed in "Table 120 — Entries
common to all font descriptors". Additional entries in the font descriptor for a CIDFont are described in
9.8.3, "Font descriptors for CIDFonts". All dimensional values shall be units in glyph space. The
conversion from glyph space to text space is described in 9.2.4, "Glyph positioning and metrics".
Table 120 — Entries common to all font descriptors
Key                 Type                Value
Type                name                (Required) The type of PDF object that this dictionary describes; shall be
FontDescriptor for a font descriptor.
FontName            name                (Required) The PostScript name of the font. This name shall be the same
as the value of BaseFont in the font or CIDFont dictionary that refers to
this font descriptor.
FontFamily          byte string         (Optional; PDF 1.5) A byte string specifying the preferred font family
name.
EXAMPLE 1          For the font Times Bold Italic, the FontFamily is Times.
FontStretch         name                (Optional; PDF 1.5) The font stretch value. It shall be one of these names
(ordered from narrowest to widest): UltraCondensed, ExtraCondensed,
Condensed, SemiCondensed, Normal, SemiExpanded, Expanded,
ExtraExpanded or UltraExpanded.
The specific interpretation of these values varies from font to font.
EXAMPLE 2          Condensed in one font might appear most similar to Normal in
another.
Key           Type        Value
FontWeight    number      (Optional; PDF 1.5) The weight (thickness) component of the fully-
qualified font name or font specifier. If present, the value shall be one of
100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, or 900, where each number
indicates a weight that is at least as dark as its predecessor. A value of
400 shall indicate a normal weight; 700 shall indicate bold.
The specific interpretation of these values varies from font to font.
EXAMPLE 3         300 in one font might appear most similar to 500 in another.
Flags         integer     (Required) A collection of flags defining various characteristics of the font
(see 9.8.2, "Font descriptor flags").
FontBBox      rectangle   (Required except for Type 3 fonts) A rectangle (see 7.9.5, "Rectangles"),
expressed in the glyph coordinate system, that shall specify the font
bounding box. This should be the smallest rectangle enclosing the shape
that would result if all of the glyphs of the font were placed with their
origins coincident and then filled.
ItalicAngle   number      (Required) The angle, expressed in degrees counterclockwise from the
vertical, of the dominant vertical strokes of the font.
EXAMPLE 4         The 9-o’clock position is 90 degrees, and the 3-o’clock position
is –90 degrees.
The value shall be negative for fonts that slope to the right, as almost all
italic fonts do
Ascent        number      (Required, except for Type 3 fonts) The maximum height above the
baseline reached by glyphs in this font. The height of glyphs for accented
characters shall be excluded.
Descent       number      (Required, except for Type 3 fonts) The maximum depth below the
baseline reached by glyphs in this font. The value shall be a negative
number.
Leading       number      (Optional) The spacing between baselines of consecutive lines of text.
Default value: 0.
CapHeight     number      (Required for fonts that have Latin characters, except for Type 3 fonts) The
vertical coordinate of the top of flat capital letters, measured from the
baseline.
XHeight       number      (Optional) The font’s x height: the vertical coordinate of the top of flat
nonascending lowercase letters (like the letter x), measured from the
baseline, in fonts that have Latin characters. Default value: 0.
StemV         number      (Required except for Type 3 fonts) The thickness measured horizontally,
of the dominant vertical stems of glyphs in the font. Values shall be
positive. A value of 0 indicates an unknown stem thickness.
StemH         number      (Optional) The thickness measured vertically of the dominant horizontal
stems of glyphs in the font. Values shall be positive. A value of 0 indicates
an unknown stem thickness. Default value: 0.
AvgWidth      number      (Optional) The average width of glyphs in the font. Default value: 0.
344                                                                            © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key                  Type               Value
MaxWidth             number             (Optional) The maximum width of glyphs in the font. Default value: 0.
MissingWidth         number             (Optional) The width to use for character codes whose widths are not
specified in a font dictionary’s Widths array. This shall have a
predictable effect only if all such codes map to glyphs whose actual
widths are the same as the value of the MissingWidth entry. Default
value: 0.
FontFile             stream             (Optional) A stream containing a Type 1 font program (see 9.9,
"Embedded font programs").
FontFile2            stream             (Optional; PDF 1.1) A stream containing a TrueType font program (see
9.9, "Embedded font programs").
FontFile3            stream             (Optional; PDF 1.2) A stream containing a font program whose format is
specified by the Subtype entry in the stream dictionary (see "Table 124
— Embedded font organisation for various font types").
CharSet              ASCII string or (Optional; meaningful only in Type 1 fonts; PDF 1.1; deprecated in PDF 2.0)
byte string     A string listing the character names defined in a font subset. The names
in this string shall be in PDF syntax — that is, each name preceded by a
slash (/). The names may appear in any order. The name .notdef shall be
omitted; it shall exist in the font subset. If this entry is absent, the only
indication of a font subset shall be the subset tag in the FontName entry
(see 9.9.2, "Font subsets").
At most, only one of the FontFile, FontFile2, and FontFile3 entries shall be present.
9.8.2 Font descriptor flags
The value of the Flags entry in a font descriptor shall be an unsigned 32-bit integer containing flags
specifying various characteristics of the font. Bit positions within the flag word are numbered from 1
(low-order) to 32 (high-order). "Table 121 — Font flags" shows the meanings of the flags; all
undefined flag bits are reserved and shall be set to 0 by PDF writers. "Figure 63 — Characteristics
represented in the Flags entry of a font descriptor" shows examples of fonts with these characteristics.
Table 121 — Font flags
Bit position    Name             Meaning
1               FixedPitch       All glyphs have the same width (as opposed to proportional or
variable-pitch fonts, which have different widths).
2               Serif            Glyphs have serifs, which are short strokes drawn at an angle on the
top and bottom of glyph stems. (Sans serif fonts do not have serifs.)
3               Symbolic         Font contains glyphs outside the Standard Latin character set. This
flag and the Nonsymbolic flag shall not both be set or both be clear.
4               Script           Glyphs resemble cursive handwriting.
Bit position   Name          Meaning
6              Nonsymbolic Font uses the Standard Latin character set or a subset of it. This flag
and the Symbolic flag shall not both be set or both be clear.
7              Italic        Glyphs have dominant vertical strokes that are slanted.
17             AllCap        Font contains no lowercase letters; typically used for display
purposes, such as for titles or headlines.
18             SmallCap      Font contains both uppercase and lowercase letters. The uppercase
letters are similar to those in the regular version of the same typeface
family. The glyphs for the lowercase letters have the same shapes as
the corresponding uppercase letters, but they are sized and their
proportions adjusted so that they have the same size and stroke
weight as lowercase glyphs in the same typeface family.
19             ForceBold     See description after Note 1 in this subclause.
The Nonsymbolic flag (bit 6 in the Flags entry) indicates that the font’s character set is the Standard
Latin character set (or a subset of it) and that it uses the standard names for those glyphs. This
character set is shown in D.2, "Latin character set and encodings". If the font contains any glyphs
outside this set, the Symbolic flag shall be set and the Nonsymbolic flag shall be clear. In other words,
any font whose character set is not a subset of the Standard character set is considered to be symbolic.
This influences the font’s default base encoding and may affect a PDF processor’s font substitution
strategies.
The use of the two flags to represent a single binary choice is a historical accident. A PDF processor
should always check the Symbolic flag to determine whether the state is Symbolic or NonSymbolic.
PDF writers should still set the NonSymbolic flag to be the inverse of the Symbolic flag for backward
compatibility.
NOTE 1     This classification of nonsymbolic and symbolic fonts is peculiar to PDF. A font can contain
additional characters that are used in Latin writing systems but are outside the Standard Latin
character set; PDF considers such a font to be symbolic.
The ForceBold flag (bit 19) shall determine whether bold glyphs shall be painted with extra pixels even
at very small text sizes by a PDF processor. If the ForceBold flag is set, features of bold glyphs may be
thickened at small text sizes.
NOTE 2     Typically, when glyphs are painted at small sizes on very low-resolution devices such as display
screens, features of bold glyphs can appear only 1 pixel wide. Because this is the minimum
feature width on a pixel-based device, ordinary (nonbold) glyphs also appear with 1-pixel-wide
features and therefore cannot be distinguished from bold glyphs.
346                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Figure 63 — Characteristics represented in the Flags entry of a font descriptor
EXAMPLE           This code sample illustrates a font descriptor whose Flags entry has the Serif, Nonsymbolic, and ForceBold
flags (bits 2, 6, and 19) set.
7 0 obj
<</Type /FontDescriptor
/FontName /AGaramond-Semibold
/Flags 262178                                                         %Bits 2, 6, and 19
/FontBBox [-177 -269 1123 866]
/MissingWidth 255
/StemV 105
/StemH 45
/CapHeight 660
/XHeight 394
/Ascent 720
/Descent -270
/Leading 83
/MaxWidth 1212
/AvgWidth 478
/ItalicAngle 0
>>
endobj
9.8.3 Font descriptors for CIDFonts
9.8.3.1           General
In addition to the entries in "Table 120 — Entries common to all font descriptors", the FontDescriptor
dictionaries of CIDFonts may contain the entries listed in "Table 122 — Additional font descriptor
entries for CIDFonts".
Table 122 — Additional font descriptor entries for CIDFonts
Key            Type             Value
Style          dictionary       (Optional) A dictionary containing entries that describe the style of the
glyphs in the font (see 9.8.3.2, "Style").
Lang           name             (Optional; PDF 1.5) A name specifying the language of the font, which
may be used for encodings where the language is not implied by the
encoding itself. The value shall be a Language-Tag as defined in BCP 47.
If this entry is absent, such absence provides no information as to the
language of the document; in particular, an absence of this entry does
not by itself mean the language of the document is unknown.
FD             dictionary       (Optional) A dictionary whose keys identify a class of glyphs in a
CIDFont.
Each value shall be a dictionary containing entries that shall override
the corresponding values in the main font descriptor dictionary for that
class of glyphs (see 9.8.3.3, "FD").
CIDSet         stream           (Optional; deprecated in PDF 2.0) A stream identifying which CIDs are
present in the CIDFont file. If this entry is present, the CIDFont shall
contain only a subset of the glyphs in the character collection defined by
the CIDSystemInfo dictionary. If it is absent, the only indication of a
CIDFont subset shall be the subset tag in the FontName entry (see 9.9.2,
"Font subsets").
The stream’s data shall be organised as a table of bits indexed by CID.
The bits shall be stored in bytes with the high-order bit first. Each bit
shall correspond to a CID. The most significant bit of the first byte shall
correspond to CID 0, the next bit to CID 1, and so on.
9.8.3.2         Style
The Style dictionary contains entries that define style attributes and values for the CIDFont. Only the
Panose entry is defined. The value of Panose shall be a 12-byte string consisting of these elements:
•    The font family class and subclass ID bytes, given in the FamilyClass field of the "OS/2" table in a
TrueType font. This field is documented in Microsoft’s TrueType 1.0 Font Files Technical
Specification.
•    Ten bytes for the PANOSE classification number for the font. The PANOSE classification system is
documented in Hewlett-Packard Company’s PANOSE Classification Metrics Guide.
See 2, "Normative references" for more information about these documents.
EXAMPLE         This is an example of a Style entry in the font descriptor:
/Style <</Panose <01 05 02 02 03 00 00 00 00 00 00 00>>>
9.8.3.3         FD
A CIDFont may be made up of different classes of glyphs, each class requiring different sets of the font-
wide attributes that appear in font descriptors.
348                                                                                          © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
EXAMPLE 1         Latin glyphs, for example, may require different attributes than kanji glyphs.
The font descriptor shall define a set of default attributes that apply to all glyphs in the CIDFont. The
FD entry in the font descriptor shall contain exceptions to these defaults.
The key for each entry in an FD dictionary shall be the name of a class of glyphs — that is, a particular
subset of the CIDFont’s character collection. The entry’s value shall be a font descriptor whose contents
shall override the font-wide attributes for that class only. This font descriptor shall contain entries for
metric information only; it shall not include FontFile, FontFile2, FontFile3, or any of the entries listed
in “Table 120 — Entries common to all font descriptors”.
The FD dictionary should contain at least the metrics for the proportional Latin glyphs. With the
information for these glyphs, a more accurate substitution font can be created.
The names of the glyph classes depend on the character collection, as identified by the Registry,
Ordering, and Supplement entries in the CIDSystemInfo dictionary. "Table 123 — Glyph classes in
CJK fonts" lists the valid keys for the Adobe-GB1, Adobe-CNS1, Adobe-Japan1, Adobe-Japan2
(deprecated in PDF 2.0 (2020)), Adobe-Korea1 (deprecated in PDF 2.0 (2020)) and Adobe-KR (added in
PDF 2.0 (2020)) character collections.
Table 123 — Glyph classes in CJK fonts
Character Collection                Class                  Glyphs in Class
Adobe-GB1                           Alphabetic             Full-width Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic glyphs
Dingbats               Special symbols
Generic                Typeface-independent glyphs, such as line-drawing
Hanzi                  Full-width hanzi (Chinese) glyphs
HRoman                 Half-width Latin glyphs
HRomanRot              Same as HRoman but rotated for use in vertical writing
Kana                   Japanese kana (katakana and hiragana) glyphs
Proportional           Proportional Latin glyphs
ProportionalRot        Same as Proportional but rotated for use in vertical writing
Adobe-CNS1                          Alphabetic             Full-width Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic glyphs
Dingbats               Special symbols
Generic                Typeface-independent glyphs, such as line-drawing
Hanzi                  Full-width hanzi (Chinese) glyphs
HRoman                 Half-width Latin glyphs
HRomanRot              Same as HRoman but rotated for use in vertical writing
Kana                   Japanese kana (katakana and hiragana) glyphs
Proportional           Proportional Latin glyphs
ProportionalRot        Same as Proportional but rotated for use in vertical writing
Character Collection             Class                  Glyphs in Class
Adobe-Japan1                     Alphabetic             Full-width Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic glyphs
AlphaNum               Numeric glyphs
Dingbats               Special symbols
DingbatsRot            Same as Dingbats but rotated for use in vertical writing
Generic                Typeface-independent glyphs, such as line-drawing
GenericRot             Same as Generic but rotated for use in vertical writing
HKana                  Half-width kana (katakana and hiragana) glyphs
HKanaRot               Same as HKana but rotated for use in vertical writing
HRoman                 Half-width Latin glyphs
HRomanRot              Same as HRoman but rotated for use in vertical writing
Kana                   Full-width kana (katakana and hiragana) glyphs
Kanji                  Full-width kanji (Chinese) glyphs
Proportional           Proportional Latin glyphs
ProportionalRot        Same as Proportional but rotated for use in vertical writing
Ruby                   Glyphs used for setting ruby (small glyphs that serve to
annotate other glyphs with meanings or readings)
Adobe-Japan2 (deprecated in      Alphabetic             Full-width Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic glyphs
PDF 2.0 (2020))                  Dingbats               Special symbols
HojoKanji              Full-width kanji glyphs
Adobe-Korea1 (deprecated in      Alphabetic             Full-width Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic glyphs
PDF 2.0 (2020))                  Dingbats               Special symbols
Adobe-KR (added in PDF 2.0       Generic                Typeface-independent glyphs, such as line-drawing
(2020))
Hangul                 Hangul and jamo glyphs
Hanja                  Full-width hanja (Chinese) glyphs
HRoman                 Half-width Latin glyphs
HRomanRot              Same as HRoman but rotated for use in vertical writing
Kana                   Japanese kana (katakana and hiragana) glyphs
Proportional           Proportional Latin glyphs
ProportionalRot        Same as Proportional but rotated for use in vertical writing
EXAMPLE 2      This example illustrates an FD dictionary containing two entries.
/FD   <</Proportional 25 0 R
/HKana 26 0 R
>>
25 0 obj
<</Type /FontDescriptor
/FontName /HeiseiMin-W3-Proportional
/Flags 2
/AvgWidth 478
/MaxWidth 1212
/MissingWidth 250
/StemV 105
/StemH 45
/CapHeight 660
/XHeight 394
/Ascent 720
350                                                                                         © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
/Descent -270
/Leading 83
>>
endobj
26 0 obj
<</Type /FontDescriptor
/FontName /HeiseiMin-W3-HKana
/Flags 3
/AvgWidth 500
/MaxWidth 500
/MissingWidth 500
/StemV 50
/StemH 75
/Ascent 720
/Descent 0
/Leading 83
>>
endobj
9.9      Embedded font programs
9.9.1 General
This clause describes how a font program can be embedded in a PDF file as data contained in a PDF
stream object.
For text in text rendering mode 3, font programs may be embedded. For text in other text rendering
modes, font programs should be embedded.
NOTE 1      Such a stream object is also called a font file by analogy with font programs that are available
from sources external to PDF processors.
Font programs are subject to copyright, and the copyright owner may impose conditions under which
a font program may be used. These permissions are recorded either in the font program or as part of a
separate license. One of the conditions may be that the font program cannot be embedded, in which
case it should not be incorporated into a PDF file. A font program may allow embedding for the sole
purpose of viewing and printing the document but not for creating new or modified text that uses the
font (in either the same document or other documents). The latter operation would require the user
performing the operation to have a licensed copy of the font program, not a copy extracted from the
PDF file. In the absence of explicit information to the contrary, embedded font programs shall be used
only to view and print the document and not for any other purposes.
"Table 124 — Embedded font organisation for various font types" summarises the ways in which font
programs shall be embedded in a PDF file, depending on the representation of the font program. The
key shall be the name used in the font descriptor to refer to the font file stream; the subtype shall be
the value of the Subtype key, if present, in the font file stream dictionary.
Table 124 — Embedded font organisation for various font types
Key         Subtype         Description
FontFile    —               Type 1 font program, in the original (noncompact) format described in
Adobe Type 1 Font Format. This entry may appear in the font descriptor
for a Type1 or MMType1 font dictionary.
The font program provided as the value of this key shall conform to the
Adobe Type 1 Font Format and/or Adobe Technical Note #5015, Type 1
Font Format Supplement.
FontFile2   —               (PDF 1.1) TrueType font program, as described in the TrueType Reference
Manual. This entry may appear in the font descriptor for a TrueType font
dictionary or (PDF 1.3) for a CIDFontType2 CIDFont dictionary.
The font program provided as the value of this key shall conform to the
TrueType Reference Manual. The font program shall include these tables:
"glyf", "head", "hhea", "hmtx", "loca", and "maxp". The "cvt " (notice the
trailing SPACE), "fpgm", and "prep" tables shall also be included if they
are required by the font instructions.
FontFile3   Type1C          (PDF 1.2) Type 1–equivalent font program represented in the Compact
Font Format (CFF), as described in Adobe Technical Note #5176, The
Compact Font Format Specification. This entry may appear in the font
descriptor for a Type1 or MMType1 font dictionary.
The font program provided as the value of this key shall conform to
Adobe Technical Note #5176.
FontFile3   CIDFontType0C (PDF 1.3) Type 0 CIDFont program represented in the Compact Font
Format (CFF), as described in Adobe Technical Note #5176, The Compact
Font Format Specification. This entry may appear in the font descriptor
for a CIDFontType0 CIDFont dictionary.
The font program provided as the value of this key shall conform to
Adobe Technical Note #5176.
352                                                                                      © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Key           Subtype              Description
FontFile3     OpenType             (PDF 1.6) OpenType font program, as described in ISO/IEC 14496-22.
OpenType is an extension of TrueType that allows inclusion of font
programs that use the Compact Font Format (CFF).
•   A TrueType font dictionary or a CIDFontType2 CIDFont dictionary, if the
embedded font program contains a "glyf" table. In addition to the "glyf"
table, the font program shall include these tables: "head", "hhea", "hmtx",
"loca", and "maxp". The "cvt " (notice the trailing SPACE), "fpgm", and
"prep" tables shall also be included if they are required by the font
instructions.
•   A CIDFontType0 CIDFont dictionary, if the embedded font program
contains a "CFF " table (notice the trailing SPACE) with a Top DICT that
uses CIDFont operators (this is equivalent to subtype CIDFontType0C). In
addition to the "CFF " table, the font program shall include the "cmap"
table.
•   A Type1 font dictionary or CIDFontType0 CIDFont dictionary, if the
embedded font program contains a "CFF " table without CIDFont operators.
In addition to the "CFF " table, the font program shall include the "cmap"
table.
A FontFile3 entry with an OpenType subtype may appear in the font
descriptor for these types of font dictionaries.
ISO/IEC 14496-22 describes a set of required tables; however, not all
tables are required in the font file, as described for each type of font
dictionary that can include this entry.
The font program provided as the value of this key shall conform to
ISO/IEC 14496-22:2019.
NOTE    The absence of some optional tables (such as those used for advanced
line layout) can prevent editing of text containing the font.
The stream dictionary for a font file shall contain the normal entries for a stream, such as Length and
Filter (listed in "Table 5 — Entries common to all stream dictionaries"), plus the additional entries
listed in "Table 125 — Additional entries in an embedded font stream dictionary".
Table 125 — Additional entries in an embedded font stream dictionary
Key           Type          Value
Length1       integer       (Required for Type 1 and TrueType font programs) The length in bytes of the
clear-text portion of the Type 1 font program, or the entire TrueType font
program, after it has been decoded using the filters specified by the stream’s
Filter entry, if any.
Length2       integer       (Required for Type 1 font programs) The length in bytes of the encrypted
portion of the Type 1 font program after it has been decoded using the filters
specified by the stream’s Filter entry.
Length3       integer       (Required for Type 1 font programs) The length in bytes of the fixed-content
portion of the Type 1 font program after it has been decoded using the filters
specified by the stream’s Filter entry. If Length3 is 0, it indicates that the
512 zeros and cleartomark have not been included in the FontFile font
program and shall be added by the PDF processor.
Key          Type       Value
Subtype      name       (Required if referenced from FontFile3; PDF 1.2) A name specifying the
format of the embedded font program. The name shall be Type1C for Type 1
compact fonts, CIDFontType0C for Type 0 compact CIDFonts, or OpenType
for OpenType fonts.
NOTE 2      A standard Type 1 font program, as described in the Adobe Type 1 Font Format specification,
consists of three parts: a clear-text portion (written using PostScript syntax), an encrypted
portion, and a fixed-content portion. The fixed-content portion contains 512 ASCII zeros
followed by a cleartomark operator, and perhaps followed by additional data. Although the
encrypted portion of a standard Type 1 font can be in binary or ASCII hexadecimal format, PDF
supports only the binary format. However, the entire font program can be encoded using any
filters.
EXAMPLE         This code shows the structure of an embedded standard Type 1 font.
12 0 obj
<</Filter /ASCII85Decode
/Length 41116
/Length1 2526
/Length2 32393
/Length3 570
>>
stream
,p>`rDKJj'E+LaU0eP.@+AH9dBOu$hFD55nC
… Omitted data…
JJQ&Nt')<=^p&mGf(%:%h1%9c//K(/*o=.C>UXkbVGTrr~>
endstream
endobj
As noted in "Table 124 — Embedded font organisation for various font types", a Type 1–equivalent
font program or a Type 0 CIDFont program may be represented in the Compact Font Format (CFF). The
Length1, Length2, and Length3 entries are not needed in that case and shall not be present. Although
CFF enables multiple font or CIDFont programs to be bundled together in a single file, an embedded
CFF font file in PDF shall consist of exactly one font or CIDFont (as appropriate for the associated font
dictionary).
According to the Adobe Type 1 Font Format specification, a Type 1 font program may contain a
PaintType entry specifying whether the glyphs’ outlines are to be filled or stroked. For fonts
embedded in a PDF file, this entry shall be ignored; the decision whether to fill or stroke glyph outlines
is entirely determined by the PDF text rendering mode parameter (see 9.3.6, "Text rendering mode").
This shall also apply to Type 1 compact fonts and Type 0 compact CIDFonts.
A TrueType font program may be used as part of either a font or a CIDFont. Although the basic font file
format is the same in both cases, there are different requirements for what information shall be
present in the font program. These TrueType tables shall always be present if present in the original
TrueType font program: "head", "hhea", "loca", "maxp", "cvt ", "prep", "glyf", "hmtx", and "fpgm". If used
with a simple font dictionary, the font program shall additionally contain a "cmap" table defining one
or more encodings, as discussed in 9.6.5.4, "Encodings for TrueType fonts". If used with a CIDFont
dictionary, the "cmap" table is not needed and shall not be present, since the mapping from character
codes to glyph descriptions is provided separately.
354                                                                                        © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
The "vhea" and "vmtx" tables that specify vertical metrics shall never be used by a PDF processor. The
only way to specify vertical metrics in PDF shall be by means of the DW2 and W2 entries in a CIDFont
dictionary.
NOTE 3      Beginning with PDF 1.6, font programs can be embedded using the OpenType format, which is an
extension of the TrueType format that allows inclusion of font programs using the Compact Font
Format (CFF). It also allows inclusion of data to describe glyph substitutions, kerning, and
baseline adjustments. In addition to rendering glyphs, PDF processors can use the data in
OpenType fonts to do advanced line layout, automatically substitute ligatures, provide selections
of alternative glyphs to users, and handle complex writing scripts.
The process of finding glyph descriptions in OpenType fonts by a PDF processor shall be the following:
•    For Type 1 fonts using "CFF " tables, the process shall be as described in 9.6.5.2, "Encodings for
Type 1 fonts".
•    For TrueType fonts using "glyf" tables, the process shall be as described in 9.6.5.4, "Encodings for
TrueType fonts". Since this process sometimes produces ambiguous results, PDF writers, instead
of using a simple font, should use a Type 0 font with an Identity-H encoding and use the glyph
indices as character codes, as described following "Table 116 — Predefined CJK CMap names".
•    For CIDFontType0 fonts using "CFF " tables, the process shall be as described in the discussion of
embedded Type 0 CIDFonts in 9.7.4.2, "Glyph selection in CIDFonts".
•    For CIDFontType2 fonts using "glyf" tables, the process shall be as described in the discussion of
embedded Type 2 CIDFonts in 9.7.4.2, "Glyph selection in CIDFonts".
9.9.2 Font subsets
PDF documents may include subsets of PDF fonts whose Subtype is Type1, TrueType or OpenType. The
font and font descriptor that describe a font subset are slightly different from those of ordinary fonts.
These differences allow a PDF processor to recognise font subsets and to merge documents containing
different subsets of the same font. (For more information on font descriptors, see 9.8, "Font
descriptors".)
For a font subset, the PostScript name of the font, that is, the value of the font’s BaseFont entry and the
font descriptor’s FontName entry, shall begin with a tag followed by a plus sign (+) followed by the
PostScript name of the font from which the subset was created. The tag shall consist of exactly six
uppercase letters; the choice of letters is arbitrary, but different subsets of the same font in the same
PDF file shall have different tags. The glyph name .notdef shall be defined in the font subset.
NOTE        It is recommended that PDF processors treat multiple subset fonts as completely independent
entities, even if they appear to have been created from the same original font.
EXAMPLE           EOODIA+Poetica is the name of a subset of Poetica®, a Type 1 font.
9.10 Extraction of text content
9.10.1            General
The preceding subclauses describe all the facilities for showing text and causing glyphs to be painted
on the page. In addition to rendering text, PDF processors often need to determine the information
content of text — that is, its meaning according to some standard character identification as opposed
to its rendered appearance. This need arises during operations such as searching, indexing, and
exporting of text to other file formats.
Unicode defines a system for numbering all of the common characters used in a large number of
languages. It is a suitable scheme for representing the information content of text, but not its
appearance, since Unicode values identify characters, not glyphs. For information about Unicode, see
the Unicode Standard by the Unicode Consortium.
When extracting character content, a PDF processor can easily convert text to Unicode values if a font’s
characters are identified according to a standard character set that is known to the PDF processor. This
character identification can occur if either the font uses a standard named encoding or the characters
in the font are identified by standard character names or CIDs in a well-known collection. 9.10.2,
"Mapping character codes to Unicode values", describes in detail the overall algorithm for mapping
character codes to Unicode values.
If a font is not defined in one of these ways, the glyphs can still be shown, but the characters cannot be
converted to Unicode values without additional information using the following methods:
•    This information can be provided as an optional ToUnicode entry in the font dictionary (PDF 1.2;
see 9.10.3, "ToUnicode CMaps"), whose value shall be a stream object containing a special kind of
CMap file that maps character codes to Unicode values.
•    An ActualText entry for a structure element or marked-content sequence (see 14.9.4,
"Replacement text") may be used to specify the text content directly.
9.10.2          Mapping character codes to Unicode values
A PDF processor can use these methods, in the priority given, to map a character code to a Unicode
value. Tagged PDF documents, in particular, shall provide at least one of these methods (see 14.8.2.6,
"Unicode mapping in tagged PDF"):
•    If the font dictionary contains a ToUnicode CMap (see 9.10.3, "ToUnicode CMaps"), use that CMap
to convert the character code to Unicode.
•    If the font is a simple font and the glyph selection algorithm (see 9.6.5, "Character encoding") uses
a glyph name, that name can be looked up in the Adobe Glyph List and Adobe Glyph List for New
Fonts to obtain the corresponding Unicode value.
•    If the font is a composite font that uses one of the predefined CMaps listed in "Table 116 —
Predefined CJK CMap names" (except Identity–H and Identity–V) or whose descendant CIDFont
uses the Adobe-GB1, Adobe-CNS1, Adobe-Japan1, Adobe-Korea1 (deprecated in PDF 2.0 (2020)) or
Adobe-KR (added in PDF 2.0 (2020)) character collection:
a. Map the character code to a character identifier (CID) according to the font’s CMap.
b. Obtain the registry and ordering of the character collection used by the font’s CMap (for
example, Adobe and Japan1) from its CIDSystemInfo dictionary.
c.   Construct a second CMap name by concatenating the registry and ordering obtained in step (b)
in the format registry–ordering–UCS2 (for example, Adobe–Japan1–UCS2).
d. Obtain the CMap with the name constructed in step (c) (available from a variety of online
sources, e.g. https://github.com/adobe-type-tools/mapping-resources-pdf).
e. Map the CID obtained in step (a) according to the CMap obtained in step (d), producing a
Unicode value.
Type 0 fonts whose descendant CIDFonts use the Adobe-GB1, Adobe-CNS1, Adobe-Japan1, Adobe-
356                                                                                     © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
Korea1 (deprecated in PDF 2.0 (2020)) or Adobe-KR (added in PDF 2.0 (2020)) character collection (as
specified in the CIDSystemInfo dictionary) shall have a supplement number corresponding to the
version of PDF supported by the PDF processor.
If these methods fail to produce a Unicode value, there is no way to determine what the character code
represents in which case a PDF processor may choose a character code of their choosing.
9.10.3            ToUnicode CMaps
The CMap defined in the ToUnicode entry of the font dictionary shall follow the syntax for CMaps
introduced in 9.7.5, "CMaps" and fully documented in Adobe Technical Note #5014, Adobe CMap and
CIDFont Files Specification. This CMap differs from an ordinary one in these ways:
•    The only pertinent entry in the CMap stream dictionary (see "Table 118 — Additional entries in a
CMap stream dictionary") is UseCMap, which may be used if the CMap is based on another
ToUnicode CMap.
•    The CMap file shall contain begincodespacerange and endcodespacerange operators that are
consistent with the encoding that the font uses. In particular, for a simple font, the codespace shall
be one byte long.
•    It shall use the beginbfchar, endbfchar, beginbfrange, and endbfrange operators to define the
mapping from character codes to Unicode character sequences expressed in UTF-16BE encoding.
For simple fonts, character codes shall be written as 1 byte in the ToUnicode CMap.
For CID keyed fonts character codes may have 1 byte, 2 bytes, or more than 2 bytes in the ToUnicode
CMap.
EXAMPLE 1         This example illustrates a Type 0 font that uses the Identity-H CMap to map from character codes to CIDs
and whose descendant CIDFont uses the Identity mapping from CIDs to TrueType glyph indices. Text strings
shown using this font simply use a 2-byte glyph index for each glyph. In the absence of a ToUnicode entry,
no information would be available about what the glyphs mean.
14 0 obj
<</Type /Font
/Subtype /Type0
/BaseFont /Ryumin-Light
/Encoding /Identity-H
/DescendantFonts [15 0 R]
/ToUnicode 16 0 R
>>
endobj
15 0 obj
<</Type /Font
/Subtype /CIDFontType2
/BaseFont /Ryumin-Light
/CIDSystemInfo 17 0 R
/FontDescriptor 18 0 R
/CIDToGIDMap /Identity
>>
endobj
EXAMPLE 2         In this example, the value of the ToUnicode entry is a stream object that contains the definition of the CMap.
The begincodespacerange and endcodespacerange operators define the source character code range to
be the 2-byte character codes from <00 00> to <FF FF>. The specific mappings for several of the character
codes are shown.
16 0 obj
<<
/Type /CMap
/CMapName /Adobe-Identity-UCS2
/CIDSystemInfo << /Registry (Adobe) /Ordering (UCS2) /Supplement 0 >>
/Length 433
>>
stream
/CIDInit /ProcSet findresource begin
12 dict begin
begincmap
/CIDSystemInfo
<</Registry (Adobe)
/Ordering (UCS2)
/Supplement 0
>> def
/CMapName /Adobe-Identity-UCS2 def
/CMapType 2 def
1 begincodespacerange
<0000>      <FFFF>
endcodespacerange
2 beginbfrange
<0000>      <005E>      <0020>
<005F>      <0061>      [<00660066> <00660069> <00660066006C>]
endbfrange
1 beginbfchar
<3A51>      <D840DC3E>
endbfchar
endcmap
CMapName currentdict /CMap defineresource pop
end
end
endstream
endobj
<00 00> to <00 5E> are mapped to the Unicode values SPACE (U+0020) to TILDE (U+007E) This is followed
by the definition of a mapping where each character code represents more than one Unicode value:
<005F> <0061> [<00660066> <00660069> <00660066006C>]
In this case, the original character codes are the glyph indices for the ligatures ff, fi, and ffl. The entry defines
the mapping from the character codes <00 5F>, <00 60>, and <00 61> to the strings of Unicode values with
a Unicode scalar value for each character in the ligature: LATIN SMALL LETTER F (U+0066) LATIN SMALL
LETTER F (U+0066) are the Unicode values for the character sequence f f, LATIN SMALL LETTER F (U+0066)
LATIN SMALL LETTER I (U+0069) for f i, and LATIN SMALL LETTER F (U+0066) LATIN SMALL LETTER F
(U+0066) LATIN SMALL LETTER L (U+006c) for f f l.
Finally, the character code <3A 51> is mapped to the Unicode value UNICODE HAN CHARACTER ‘U+2003E’
(U+2003E), which is expressed by the byte sequence <D840DC3E> in UTF-16BE encoding.
Example 2 in this subclause illustrates several extensions to the way destination values may be
defined. To support mappings from a source code to a string of destination codes, this extension has
been made to the ranges defined after a beginbfchar operator:
n beginbfchar
srcCode dstString
endbfchar
where dstString may be a string of up to 512 bytes. Likewise, mappings after the beginbfrange
operator may be defined as:
358                                                                                               © ISO 2020 – All rights reserved
n beginbfrange
srcCode1 srcCode2 dstString
endbfrange
In this case, the last byte of the string shall be incremented for each consecutive code in the source
code range.
When defining ranges of this type, the value of the last byte in the string shall be less than or equal to
255 - (srcCode2 - srcCode1). This ensures that the last byte of the string shall not be incremented past
255; otherwise, the result of mapping is undefined.
To support more compact representations of mappings from a range of source character codes to a
discontiguous range of destination codes, the CMaps used for the ToUnicode entry may use this syntax
for the mappings following a beginbfrange definition.
n beginbfrange
srcCode1 srcCode2 [dstString1 dstString2…dstStringm]
endbfrange
Consecutive codes starting with srcCode1 and ending with srcCode2 shall be mapped to the destination
strings in the array starting with dstString1 and ending with dstStringm . The value of dstString can be
a string of up to 512 bytes. The value of m represents the number of continuous character codes in the
source character code range.
𝑚 = 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒2 − 𝑠𝑟𝑐𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒1 + 1
NOTE        If number of dstString in array is different from m, the result of mapping is undefined.
